ChatGPT

ChatGPT (Chat Generative Pre-trained Transformer, literally meaning Trained Chat Generative Transformer) is an AI chatbot in the form of a generative language model that uses transformer technology to predict the probability of the next sentence or word in a conversation or text command. ChatGPT is built using the GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 large language models (LLMs) and has been tuned (transfer learning approach) using directed learning and reinforcement techniques.

ChatGPT was launched as a prototype on November 30, 2022, and quickly garnered attention for its detailed responses and articulate answers across many domains of knowledge. Its uneven factual accuracy, however, has been identified as a significant drawback. Following the release of ChatGPT, OpenAI's valuation was estimated at US$29 billion in 2023.

ChatGPT was originally released in November 2022 based on GPT-3.5; GPT-4, the newest OpenAI model, was released on March 14, 2023, and is available for ChatGPT Plus users.

Although the core function of a chatbot is to mimic a human conversationalist, ChatGPT is versatile. For example, it can write and debug computer programs, compose music, teleplays, fairy tales, and student essays; answer test questions (sometimes, depending on the test, at a level above the average human test-taker); write poetry and song lyrics; emulate a Linux system; simulate an entire chat room; play games like tic-tac-toe; and simulate an ATM. ChatGPT's training data includes man pages and information about internet phenomena and programming languages, such as bulletin board systems and the Python programming language.

Compared to its predecessor, InstructGPT, ChatGPT tries to reduce malicious and deceptive responses. In one example, while InstructGPT accepts the command premise "Tell me about when Christopher Columbus came to the U.S. in 2015" (Tell me about when Christopher Columbus arrived in the U.S. in 2015?) as true, ChatGPT recognizes the counterfactual nature of the question and constructs the answer as a hypothetical thought of what would have happened if Columbus had arrived in the U.S. in 2015, using information about Christopher Columbus' voyages and facts about the modern world - including modern perceptions of Columbus' actions.

Unlike most chatbots, ChatGPT remembers previous prompts given to it in the same conversation; journalists have suggested that this will allow ChatGPT to be used as a personalized therapist. To prevent offensive outputs from being presented to and produced from ChatGPT, queries are filtered through OpenAI's company-wide moderation API, and potentially racist or sexist prompts are dismissed.

ChatGPT was met in December 2022 with some positive reviews. Kevin Roose of The New York Times labeled it "the best artificial intelligence chatbot ever released to the general public". Samantha Lock of The Guardian newspaper noted that it was able to generate "impressively detailed" and "human-like" text. Technology writer Dan Gillmor used ChatGPT on a student assignment, and found its generated text was on par with what a good student would deliver and opined that "academia has some very serious issues to confront".