Royal Palace

The Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat Palace or Yogyakarta Palace is the official palace of the Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat Sultanate which is now located in the city of Yogyakarta. The palace was founded by Sri Sultan Hamengkubuwana I in 1755 as the newly established Palace/Keraton of Yogyakarta due to the division of the Islamic Mataram with the Giyanti Agreement. This palace is a fragment of the Surakarta Hadiningrat Palace of the Surakarta Islamic Mataram (Surakarta Kingdom). So that the Mataram dynasty was continued by 2 kingdoms, namely the Sultanate of Yogyakarta and the Surakarta Sultanate. The total area of the Yogyakarta palace reaches 184 hectares, which includes all areas within the Baluwarti fort, alun-alun Lor, alun-alun Kidul, Gladak gate, and the Yogyakarta Gedhe Mosque complex. While the area of the kedhaton (the core of the palace) reaches 13 hectares. 

Although the Sultanate of Yogyakarta officially became part of the Republic of Indonesia in 1945, the palace complex still functions as the residence of the sultan and his household, which still carries on the sultanate's traditions to this day. The palace is now also one of the tourist attractions in the city of Yogyakarta. Part of the palace complex is a museum that houses various collections belonging to the sultanate, including various gifts from European kings, replicas of palace heirlooms, and gamelan. In terms of buildings, the palace is one of the finest examples of Javanese palace architecture, boasting lavish balairungs and spacious courts and pavilions.

Yogyakarta Palace was founded by Sultan Hamengku Buwono I a few months after the Giyanti Agreement in 1755. The location of the palace is said to be the former site of an enclosure called Garjitawati. It was used to rest the cortege of the Mataram kings (Kartasura and Surakarta) who would be buried in Imogiri. Another version states that the location of the palace is a spring, Umbul Pacethokan, in the middle of the Beringan forest. Before occupying Yogyakarta Palace, Sultan Hamengku Buwono I lived in Ambar Ketawang Pesanggrahan, which is now included in the Gamping District of Sleman Regency. The move (boyongan) of the Sultan and his followers from Gamping to Ngayogyakarta Hadiningrat Palace was marked by the surya sengkala Dwi Naga Rasa Tunggal, which has a value of 1756 AD. The sengkalan means the unity of mutual cooperation, as well as the authority, power, and sanctity of a king or leader, and as an obstacle repellent as well as a belief in safety, tranquility, and the hope of achieving prosperity of a kingdom that is built.

On June 20, 1812, Sir Stamford Raffles led 1,200 British and Irish soldiers to attack the walled royal city of Yogyakarta. Although they outnumbered the British, the Javanese were not prepared for the attack. Yogyakarta fell in one day, and the palace was captured and burned. It was the first attack on a Javanese court, and the Sultanate of Yogyakarta briefly came under British rule before the British government returned control of Indonesia to the Dutch. Most of the current palace was built by Sultan Hamengku Buwono VIII (who reigned from 1921 to 1939), and rebuilt after earthquakes in 1876 and 2006.

The chief architect of the palace was Sultan Hamengkubuwana I, the founder of Ngayogyakarta Sultanate. His expertise in architecture was appreciated by Dutch scholars Theodoor Gautier Thomas Pigeaud and Lucien Adam who considered him as the "architect" of Pakubuwono II's brother Surakarta". The main buildings and basic spatial design of the palace and the basic landscape design of the old city of Yogyakarta were completed between 1755-1756. Other buildings were added later by subsequent Sultans of Yogyakarta. The palace as it appears today is largely the result of restoration work carried out by Sultan Hamengku Buwono VIII (reigned 1921-1939).

In general, each main complex consists of a courtyard covered with sand from the south coast, the main and companion buildings, and sometimes certain trees. The complexes are separated from each other by a high wall and connected by a regol, usually in the Semar Tinandu style. The door leaves are made of thick teak wood. Behind or in front of each gate is usually a partition wall called Renteng or Baturono. On certain regols, this partition has a distinctive ornamentation.

The Roto Wijayan complex is the part of the palace for storing and maintaining horse-drawn carriages. This place may be referred to as the palace garage. Now the Roto Wijayan complex is the Palace Carriage Museum. In this complex are still stored various royal carriages that were used as official vehicles. Some of them are KNy Jimat, KK Garuda Yaksa, and Kyai Rata Pralaya. This place can be visited by tourists.

KK Guntur Sari was used to accompany Beksan Lawung, a sacred dance, at the wedding ceremony of the Sultan's son. KK Surak is played to accompany uyon-uyon (traditional Javanese songs), dances and shadow puppets. There are special pairings of gamelan such as KK Harja Nagara (slendro scale) with KK Harja Mulya (pelog scale) and KK Madu Murti (slendro scale) with KK Madu Kusumo (pelog scale).