Malioboro

Malioboro Street (Javanese: ꦢꦭꦤ꧀ꦩꦭꦶꦪꦧꦫ, translit. Dalan Maliabara) is the name of one of the three streets in Yogyakarta City that stretches from Tugu Yogyakarta to the intersection of Yogyakarta's Zero Kilometer Point. Overall, the Malioboro area consists of Jalan Margo Utomo, Jalan Malioboro, and Jalan Margo Mulyo. This road is the axis of the Yogyakarta Kraton Imaginary Line. It lies north-south axis on the line between Kraton Yogyakarta and Mount Merapi. This in itself is important for many locals, the north-south orientation between the palace and the volcano being important.

This road connects Tugu Yogyakarta to the approach of the Yogyakarta Palace complex. On the north side is Jalan Margo Utomo, which runs from the south of the Tugu area to the east side of Yogyakarta Station. Jalan Margo Utomo and Jalan Malioboro are separated by a unique railroad crossing, which uses a sliding doorstop. 

In the past, this crossing could be crossed by public transportation to connect Jalan Margo Utomo to Malioboro. However, due to the increasing volume of vehicles passing through, this crossing can only be crossed by small vehicles such as pedicabs or bicycles, while other vehicles must first turn east through Kewek Bridge, then turn west through Jalan Abu Bakar Ali, then arrive at Malioboro Street.

For many years in the 1980s and afterward, a cigarette advertisement was placed on the first building south of the railroad tracks - or effectively the last building in Malioboro, advertising Marlboro cigarettes, no doubt appealing to locals and foreigners who would notice the pun on the street name with the foreign product being advertised.

Malioboro Street actually only stretches from the south side of the railroad tracks, in front of the Grand Inna Hotel to end at Pasar Beringharjo on the east side. From this point, the street name changes to Jalan Margo Mulyo until Yogyakarta's Zero Kilometer Point. Malioboro Street becomes the boundary between Gedongtengen Kemantren and Danurejan Kemantren, where the west side of Malioboro is the territory of Gedongtengen Kemantren, and the east side of Malioboro is the territory of Danurejan Kemantren. While the entire side of Margo Utomo street is the area of Kemantren Jetis, and the side of Margo Mulyo street is the area of Kemantren Gondomanan.

There are several historical objects in this area, including Tugu Yogyakarta, Yogyakarta Station, Gedung Agung, Beringharjo Market, Yogyakarta Legislative Council Office, Vredeburg Fort, Grand Inna Hotel, Yogyakarta Governor's Office Complex, and the March 1 General Attack Monument.

Malioboro Street is famous for its street vendors selling Jogja handicrafts and lesehan stalls at night selling Jogja cuisine such as gudeg. This street is also famous as a gathering place for artists who often express their skills such as playing music, painting, happening art, mime, and others.