Ratu Boko

Ratu Boko Site or the Palace of King Baka (Javanese: ꦏꦫꦠꦺꦴꦤ꧀ꦫꦠꦸꦧꦏ, translit. Karaton Ratu Båkå) is an ancient site which is a complex of a number of building remains located approximately 3 km south of the Prambanan Temple complex, 18 km east of Yogyakarta City or 50 km southwest of Surakarta City, Central Java, more precisely in the Bokoharjo sub-district, Prambanan kapanéwon, Sleman regency, Yogyakarta Special Region. The Ratu Boko site is located on a hill at an altitude of 196 meters above sea level. The overall area of the complex is about 25 ha. The original name of the site is still unclear, but locals named the site after Raja Boko, the legendary king mentioned in the folklore of Roro Jonggrang. In Javanese, Ratu Boko means "King of Storks".

The Ratu Boko site was first reported by Van Boeckholzt in 1790, who stated that there were ancient ruins on Ratu Boko hill. This hill itself is a branch of the Sewu Mountains system, which stretches from southern Yogyakarta to the Tulungagung area. One hundred years later, research led by FDK Bosch was conducted, which was reported in Keraton van Ratoe Boko. From this it was concluded that the ruins were the remains of the palace.

According to author HJ. DeGraff, in the 17th century many European travelers to Java mentioned that there was an archaeological site associated with Raja Boko. In 1790, Dutch researcher Van Boeckholtz was the first to discover archaeological ruins on top of Ratu Boko Hill. The hill itself is the northwestern branch of the larger Sewu mountain system, located in the southern part of Central Java and East Java stretching from Yogyakarta to Tulungagung. The publication of this discovery attracted scientists such as Mackenzie, Junghun and Brumun to conduct research and exploration at the site in 1814. In the early 20th century, the Ratu Boko site was thoroughly studied by researcher FDK Bosch, who published his findings in a report entitled "Keraton Van Ratoe Boko". From this report it was concluded that the ruins were the remains of the palace. During his research, Mackenzie also found a statue of a man and woman with gold heads embracing each other. A stone pillar with ornaments of zoomorphic figures including elephants, horses, and others, was also found among the ruins.

The Abhayagiri Wihara inscription dated 792 AD is written evidence found at the Ratu Boko site. This inscription mentions a figure named Tejahpurnapane Panamkarana or Rakai Panangkaran (746-784 AD), and mentions a monastic area on a hill called Abhyagiri Wihara ("a monastery on a hill free from danger"). Rakai Panangkaran resigned as King because he wanted spiritual peace and focused his mind on religious matters, one of which was by establishing a monastery called Abhayagiri Wihara in 792 AD. Rakai Panangkaran embraced Buddhism as well as the building called Abhayagiri Wihara is a Buddhist background, as evidence is the presence of Dyani Buddha statues. However, there are also elements of Hinduism found on the Ratu Boko site, such as Durga, Ganesha and Yoni statues.

It seems that this complex was later converted into a hilltop fort by a local landlord named Rakai Walaing Pu Kumbayoni. According to the Shivagrha inscription issued by Rakai Kayuwangi on November 12, 856, this place was used as a fortress consisting of hundreds of stacked stones. This hilltop fortress was used as a stronghold during the power struggle in the latter days of the Mataram Kingdom. Inside the complex are the former gate, paseban room, pond, pavilion, pringgitan, keputren, and two cave niches for meditation.