Prambanan Temple

Prambanan Temple (Javanese: ꦕꦤ꧀ꦝꦶꦥꦿꦩ꧀ꦧꦤꦤ꧀, translit. Candhi Prambanan) is the largest Hindu temple in Indonesia built in the 9th century AD. The temple, which is also referred to as Rara Jonggrang, is dedicated to Trimurti, the three main Hindu gods, namely the god Brahma as the creator god, the god Vishnu as the preserver god, and the god Shiva as the god of destruction. Based on the Siwagrha inscription, the original name of this temple complex is Siwagrha (Sanskrit meaning 'House of Shiva'), and indeed in the garbagriha (main room) of this temple resides a three-meter-high statue of Shiva Mahadeva, due to the Shiva sect that prioritizes the worship of the god Shiva in this temple.

This temple is a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the largest Hindu temple in Indonesia, and one of the most beautiful temples in Southeast Asia. The architecture of this building is tall and slender in accordance with Hindu architecture in general with the Shiva temple as the main temple having a height of up to 47 meters towering in the middle of a complex of smaller temples. As one of the grandest temples in Southeast Asia, Prambanan temple attracts tourists from all over the world.

Local Javanese residents in the surrounding villages knew about the temple ruins before their official rediscovery, but they did not know their historical background: which kingdom ruled or which king ordered the construction of the monuments. As a result, locals developed stories and legends to explain the origins of the temples, which are filled with myths about giants, and a cursed princess. They give a fascinating origin to Prambanan and Sewu; in the legend of Rara Jonggrang, the temples are said to have been created by many demons under the orders of Bandung Bondowoso.

The people around the temples are aware of the existence of these temples. However, they do not know the real historical background, who was the king and what kingdom had built this monument. As a result of their imagination, the local people created local fairy tales or folk tales to explain the origin of these temples; filled with fantastic stories about giant kings, thousands of temples built by jinn and dedemites in just one night, and beautiful princesses cursed to become statues. The legend of Prambanan temple is known as the story of Rara Jonggrang.

Entrances to the complex can be found in all four cardinal directions, but the direction of the building is to the east, so the main entrance to the temple is the east gate. The Prambanan temple complex consists of:

3 Trimurti Temple: Shiva, Vishnu, and Brahma temples
3 Wahana temples: Nandi, Garuda, and Swan temples
2 Candi Apit: located between the rows of Trimurti temples and Wahana temples on the north and south sides
4 Kelir Temple: located in the 4 cardinal directions just behind the entrance to the inner courtyard or core zone
4 Patok Temples: located at the 4 corners of the inner courtyard or core zone
224 Perwara Temples: arranged in 4 concentric rows with the number of temples from the innermost to the outermost row: 44, 52, 60, and 68
So there are a total of 240 temples in the Prambanan complex.