Saturn

Saturn (Dutch: saturnus) or zohal (Arabic: زحل) is the sixth planet from the Sun and the second largest planet in the Solar System after Jupiter. Saturn is also a gas giant with an average radius about 9 times that of Earth. Its average density is only 1/8 that of Earth, but with a volume larger than Earth's, Saturn's mass is 95 times that of Earth. Saturn is named after the god of prosperity and agribusiness in Greek mythology; its astronomical symbol (♄) represents the sickle used by the god.

Saturn's interior most likely consists of a core containing iron, nickel, and rocks (compounds of silicon and oxygen). The core is surrounded by an inner layer of metallic hydrogen, an intermediate layer of liquid hydrogen and liquid helium, and a gaseous outer layer. Saturn has a pale yellow hue due to the ammonia crystals that fill its upper atmosphere. Electric currents within its metallic hydrogen layer are thought to generate Saturn's magnetic field, which is known to be weaker than Earth's, but has a magnetic moment 580 times greater than Earth's due to Saturn's larger size. The strength of Saturn's magnetic field is only about 1/20th of Jupiter's magnetic field strength. Despite the ordinary appearance of its outer atmosphere, there is a long-lived appearance that fills this atmospheric layer. Wind speeds on Saturn can reach up to 1,800 km/h (1,100 mph; 500 m/s), higher than those on Jupiter, but not as high as those on Neptune.

Saturn is famous for its unique ring system, which consists mainly of icy particles with a small amount of rock debris and dust. There are at least 82 known natural satellites orbiting Saturn, 53 of which have received official names; this number does not include the hundreds of minor natural satellites in the ring system. Titan, Saturn's largest natural satellite and the second-largest natural satellite in the Solar System, has a larger diameter than Mercury, but Titan's mass is less than Mercury's. Titan is also the only natural satellite in the Solar System that has a thick atmosphere.

Saturn is called a gas giant because hydrogen and helium are the main constituents of the planet. Although Saturn does not have a solid surface, it is thought to have a solid core. Saturn's shape resembles that of a spheroid, a sphere that is flattened along its axis from pole to pole so that there is a bulge around the equator. This shape results from Saturn's rotation, which causes its equatorial radius of 60,268 km to be almost 10% larger than the 54,364 km radius from pole to pole. The other giant planets Jupiter, Uranus and Neptune also have this kind of shape, but they are not as precise as Saturn. The combination of the rotation rate with the bulge around Saturn's equatorial plane results in a surface gravity of 8.96 m/s2 at the equator that is 74% higher than the surface gravity at the poles and lower than Earth's surface gravity. However, Saturn's escape velocity is almost 36 km/s, much higher than Earth's escape velocity.

Saturn is the only planet in our Solar System with a density lower than that of water (about 30% lower). Despite having a core that is much denser than water, the planet only has a relative density of 0.69 g/cm3 due to its gaseous atmosphere. Jupiter has 318 times the mass of Earth, while Saturn has 95 times the mass of Earth. These two planets make up 92% of the total mass of all planets in our Solar System.

Although most of the material is hydrogen and helium, Saturn's mass is not in the gas phase because hydrogen becomes a non-ideal solution when its density is above 0.01 g/cm3; this can be achieved at a radius that comprises 99.9% of Saturn's mass. As Saturn's temperature, pressure and density continue to increase up to its core, hydrogen will turn into metal in the deeper layers.

Saturn has a hot interior, the temperature can reach 11,700°C at the core, and the planet can radiate 2.5 times more energy into space than it gets from the Sun. Jupiter's thermal energy produced by the Kelvin-Helmholtz mechanism of slow gravitational compression is not enough to explain Saturn's heat production because Saturn's mass is smaller than Jupiter's mass. It is thought that there is an alternative or additional mechanism that allows Saturn to produce heat through a "rain" of helium droplets that occurs deep in Saturn's interior. As these helium droplets descend through lower density hydrogen, they release heat through friction and the planet's outer layers run out of helium. Diamond showers are thought to fall on Saturn, as they do on Jupiter, and the ice giants Uranus and Neptune.

Saturn's outer atmosphere contains 96.3% molecular hydrogen and 3.25% helium, but Saturn's helium content is still much less than the abundant helium content of the Sun. The amount of elements heavier than helium (metallicity) is not known for certain, but the amount is thought to be equivalent to the primordial abundance of elements from the formation of the Solar System. The total mass of these elements is estimated to be 19-31 times that of Earth, with most of their mass concentrated in the core region of Saturn.

Traces of ammonia, acetylene, ethane, propane, phosphine and methane are also found in Saturn's atmosphere. Saturn's upper clouds are composed of ammonia crystals, while the lower clouds appear to be composed of ammonium hydrosulfide (NH4SH) or water. Ultraviolet radiation from the Sun causes photolysis of methane in the upper atmosphere, leading to a series of hydrocarbon chemical reactions that form eddies and diffusions in the atmosphere. This photochemical cycle is influenced by Saturn's annual seasonal cycle.