Lawang Sewu

Lawang Sewu (Dutch: Het administratiegebouw van de Nederlandsch-Indische Spoorweg-Maatschappij, N.V. te Samarang) (Javanese: ꧋ꦭꦮꦁꦱꦺꦮꦸ meaning One Thousand Doors) is an office building located opposite Tugu Muda, Semarang City, Central Java, Indonesia, which was built as the headquarters of the Nederlandsch-Indische Spoorweg Maatschappij (NIS). The building is an asset of Kereta Api Indonesia (KAI) as it was the result of the seizure of NIS by Djawatan Kereta Api Republik Indonesia (DKARI) during the War of Independence. Currently, the building is used as a museum and gallery of railway history by the Central Unit for Architectural Preservation and Design and KAI Wisata.

The Lawang Sewu complex consists of two buildings; buildings A and B and C and D, facing Jalan Pemuda. Building A faces the Tugu Muda roundabout. There are two twin towers in building A that were originally used to store water, each with a capacity of 7,000 liters (1,800 US gal). The building has large stained glass windows and a large staircase in the center. Underneath the building is an underground passage.

Building B is located behind building A, three stories high with the first two floors consisting of offices and the third being an attic. The building with large windows also has an underground passage that serves as a water channel. In front of the building stands Tugu Muda to commemorate the Battle of Five Days.

Lawang Sewu was designed by Cosman Citroen, from a firm formed by senior architects J. F. Klinkhamer and B. J. Ouëndag. The building was designed in the New Indian Style, the academically accepted term for Dutch Rationalism in the Indies. Similar to Dutch Rationalism, the style was the result of an attempt to develop new solutions to integrate traditional precedents (classicism) with new technological possibilities. It can be described as a transitional style between Traditionalist and Modernist and was influenced by Berlage's designs.

Construction began in 1904 with building A which was completed in 1907. The rest of the building was completed in 1919. It was originally used by the Nederlandsch-Indische Spoorweg Maatschappij, the first railway company in the Dutch East Indies.

After Japan occupied the Dutch East Indies in 1942, the Japanese army took over Lawang Sewu. The basement of building B was turned into a prison with executions carried out inside. When Semarang was recaptured by the Dutch in the battle of Semarang in October 1945, Dutch troops used the tunnel leading to building A to sneak into the city. Fighting ensued with many Indonesian fighters killed. Five employees working there also died.

After the war, the Indonesian army took over the complex. The building was then operated by Djawatan Kereta Republik Indonesia (DKARI). In 1992 the building was designated as a cultural heritage.