Telegram

Telegram is a free and non-profit cloud-based multiplatform instant messaging service application. The Telegram client is available for mobile devices (Android, iOS, Windows Phone, Ubuntu Touch) and computer systems (Windows, macOS, Linux), comes in web versions called WebK and WebZ, and includes unofficial apps that use the Telegram protocol. Users can send messages and exchange photos, videos, stickers, audio, and other file types. Telegram also features optional end-to-end encryption, which is used in Secret Chats and Voice/video calls. It was first launched on February 14, 2013 on iOS devices and Android on October 20, 2013. Telegram's servers are distributed with five separate data centers around the world, while the operational center is located in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

Telegram was released by brothers Nikolai and Pavel Durov in 2013, prior to which they had created the Russian social media platform Vkontakte, which they left in 2014 as it was taken over by President Putin's allies. Pavel Durov sold his remaining stake in VK and left Russia after government pressure. Nikolai created the digital platform protocol based on messaging, while Pavel provided funding and infrastructure support from his company Digital Fortress. Telegram states that their ultimate goal is not for-profit, but they are also not a non-profit organization.

Telegram is registered as an LLP business organization in the UK and LLC in the US, which means they do not disclose where they rent offices or which legal entities they use, citing the need to protect the team from government data requests. Pavel Durov said that their headquarters were in Berlin, Germany, between 2014 and early 2015, moving due to different jurisdictions of residence for each person in the team. After Pavel Durov left Russia, he moved from country to country with his small group of 15 core programmers. According to media reports, Telegram has employees in Saint Petersburg, while its core team is based in Dubai as of 2017.

In October 2013, Telegram announced 100,000 daily active users. On March 24, 2014, Telegram announced that it had reached 35 million monthly users and 15 million daily active users. In October 2014, the South Korean government's plan to monitor its citizens led many to switch to Telegram. In December 2014, Telegram announced that it had reached 50 million active users, generating 1 billion messages daily, and 1 million new users weekly, doubling message traffic in five months with 2 billion messages daily. In September 2015, Telegram announced that the app has reached 60 million active users and has sent 12 billion daily messages.

In February 2016, Telegram announced that it had reached 100 million monthly active users, with 350,000 new users every day, sending 15 billion messages daily. In December 2017, Telegram reached 180 million monthly active users. In March 2018, Telegram reached 200 million monthly active users. On March 14, 2019, Pavel Durov claimed that "3 million new users have registered within 24 hours." Durov did not specify what prompted the large number of new users to sign up, but the timing was perfect during the prolonged technical outage experienced by Facebook and its subsidiary apps, including Instagram.

According to the US Securities and Exchange Commission, Telegram had 300 million monthly active users worldwide as of October 2019. On April 24, 2020, Telegram announced that it had reached 400 million monthly active users. On January 8, 2021, Durov announced in a blog post on Telegram that it had reached 500 million active users per month. On October 5, 2021, Telegram received 70 million new users at the time of the 2021 Facebook Blackout.

On March 21, 2022, Telegram's usage share jumped to 63%, surpassing WhatsApp's usage share of 32% to become the most popular messaging tool in Russia. On June 19, Telegram announced it had reached 700 million monthly active users.

Telegram accounts are tied to a user's phone number and verified via text message. Account creation requires an Android or iOS device regardless of which platform is being used. Users can add multiple devices to their account and receive messages from all of them. Connected devices can be removed individually or all at once. The associated number can be changed at any time and when doing so, the user's contact list will receive the new number automatically. Additionally, users can set their username as an alias which allows them to send and receive messages without revealing their phone number. Telegram accounts can be deleted at any time and are automatically deleted after six months of inactivity by default, and can optionally be changed from 1 month at the earliest to 12 months at the longest with a range between the two. Users can replace the "last seen" timestamp details with a broader message such as "last seen recently".

The default authentication method used by Telegram for login is SMS-based single-factor authentication. Sending a one-time passcode via sms to the user's number is required to log into the account by default. Users also have the option to create a password as a form of two-step verification. Telegram allows groups, bots, and officially verified social media channels or wikipedia pages to be verified but not user accounts.