Venus

Venus is the second closest planet to the Sun after Mercury. It orbits the Sun for 224.7 Earth days. Venus has no natural satellites and is named after the goddess of love and beauty in Roman mythology. After the Moon, it is the brightest natural object in the night sky, with an apparent magnitude of -4.6 which is bright enough to cast shadows. Venus is an inferior planet with an elongation angle of 47.8°. Its maximum brightness can be seen immediately before sunrise or after sunset, hence the name Morning Star or Twilight Star.

Venus is an Earth planet and is sometimes called Earth's "sister planet" due to its similar size, gravity and composition (it is the closest planet to Earth and the closest in size to Earth). However, in other ways it is very different from Earth. It has the densest atmosphere of the four Earth planets, consisting of 96% carbon dioxide. Venus' surface atmospheric pressure is 92 times greater than that of Earth. With an average surface temperature of 735 K (462 °C; 863 °F), Venus is the hottest planet in the Solar System. The planet does not have a carbon cycle that traps carbon in rocks and surface features, nor does it have organic life that can absorb carbon in the form of biomass.

Venus is covered by an opaque layer of highly reflective sulfuric acid clouds, so its surface cannot be seen from space. Venus may once have had oceans, but they are evaporating due to the continual increase in temperature caused by the greenhouse effect. Most of the water may have photodissociated, and the solar wind has caused free hydrogen to be released into space as a result of the lack of an internal magnetic field on Venus. The surface itself is deserted, dry, and punctuated by rocks that are periodically renewed by volcanic activity. The possibility of life on Venus has long been a topic of speculation, especially in Venus' clouds, which feature layers with more Earth-like conditions at an altitude of about 50 km, but despite recent indicative studies, no convincing evidence has been found so far. With Venus' rotation slowed by its strong atmospheric currents, to a sidereal rotation period of 243 Earth days, the longest among all the planets in the Solar System, and combined with its rotation in the retrograde direction, a solar day on Venus is 117 Earth days long, only about half the time it takes Venus to circle the Sun, having a solar year of 224.7 Earth days.

Venus adalah salah satu dari empat planet terestrial di Tata Surya kita, yang berarti Venus adalah planet berbatu seperti Bumi. Ukuran dan massanya mirip dengan Bumi, sehingga sering disebut sebagai "saudara" atau "kembaran" Bumi. Venus memiliki diameter 12.092 km (hanya 650 km lebih kecil dari Bumi) dan massanya sekitar 81,5% massa Bumi. Namun, kondisi di permukaan Venus sangat berbeda dengan Bumi, dan hal ini disebabkan oleh atmosfer Venus yang tebal yang terdiri dari 96,5% karbon dioksida dan 3,5% nitrogen. Tekanan permukaan adalah 9,3 megapascal (93 bar), dan suhu permukaan rata-rata adalah 737 K (464 ° C; 867 ° F), di atas titik kritis kedua konstituen utama dan membuat atmosfer permukaan menjadi fluida superkritis yang sebagian besar terdiri dari karbon dioksida superkritis dan beberapa nitrogen superkritis.