Shark Fish

Sharks or Cucut (superorder Selachimorpha) are a group of fish with a complete cartilaginous skeleton (Elasmobranchii) and a slender body. They breathe using five gill rakers (sometimes six or seven, depending on the species) beside, or starting slightly behind, their head. Sharks have a body covered in dermal denticles to protect their skin from damage, from parasites, and to increase water dynamics. They have several rows of replaceable teeth.

Modern sharks are classified in the tribe Selachimorpha (or Selachii) and are the sister group to the Batoidea (rays and their relatives). Some sources extend the term "shark" as an informal category that includes extinct members of the Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish) with shark-like morphology, such as hybodonts and xenacanths. Shark-like chondrichthyans such as Cladoselache and Doliodus first appeared in the Devonian Period (419-359 Ma), although some fossilized scales similar to chondrichthyans are as old as the Late Ordovician (458-444 Ma). The oldest modern sharks (selachians) are known to date back to the Early Jurassic, around 200 million years ago.

Sharks range from palm-sized species. From the pygmy shark (Euprotomicrus bispinatus), a deep-sea species that is only 22 cm long, to the whale shark (Rhincodon typus), which is the largest fish capable of growing to about 12 meters and feeds only on plankton through a filter in its mouth. The bull shark (Carcharhinus leucas) is the most famous of several species that swim in both marine and freshwater (this type is found in Lake Nicaragua, in Central America) and in deltas.

The skeleton of a shark is very different from that of bony fishes such as cod, as it is made of young bone (cartilage), which is very light and flexible, although the young bone in older sharks can sometimes partially calcify, making it harder and more bone-like. Shark jaws are diverse and are thought to have evolved from the first gill cavity. It is not attached to the cranium and has additional mineral deposits that give it greater strength. Cartilage is flexible and durable, but has a density about half that of normal bone. This reduces the weight of the skeleton and thus saves energy. Since sharks do not have ribs, they can easily be crushed by their own weight on land.

Unlike most bony fishes, sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed offspring instead of a large number of underdeveloped offspring. Shark fertility ranges from 2 to over 100 pups per reproductive cycle. Sharks mature slowly compared to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around 13-15 years of age.

Sharks are generally slow to reach sexual maturity and produce very few offspring compared to other fishes that are harvested. This has caused concern among biologists due to the increased efforts made to harvest sharks over the years, and many species are now considered endangered.

Sharks feature prominently in Hawaiian mythology. There are stories of shark men who have shark jaws on their backs. They can shape-shift between shark and human at times of their choosing. A common theme in these stories is that these shark men would warn people on shore that there were sharks in the waters. The shore-goers would laugh and ignore their warnings and keep swimming, only to be eaten by the same shark-men who warned them not to go into the water.

Hawaiian mythology also contains many shark gods. They believe that sharks are the guardians of the ocean, and they are called Aumakua:
Kamohoali'i-The most famous and respected shark god. He was the older and favored brother of Pele, and helped and traveled with him to Hawaii. He is able to take the form of humans and fish. A high cliff in the Kilauea crater is considered one of his most sacred places. In one of these places, he has a he'iau (shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that juts out into the ocean on the island of Moloka'i.