Pura

Pura is the term for Hindu places of worship in Indonesia. Temples in Indonesia are mainly concentrated in Bali as an island with a majority Hindu population.

The word "Pura" actually comes from the Sanskrit suffixes (-pur, -puri, -pura, -puram, -pore), which means gate, for example, angkasapura means the Gate of the sky. In the development of its use on the island of Bali, the term "Pura" became specific to places of worship; while the term "Puri" became specific to the residences of kings and nobles.

Unlike Hindu temples or shrines in India which are enclosed buildings, temples are designed as open-air places of worship consisting of several zones surrounded by walls. Each of these zones is connected by a carved gate or archway. The neighborhood or zone surrounded by this wall contains several buildings such as pelinggih, which is a sacred place where hyang resides, meru, which is a tower with a stacked roof, and bale (pavilion). The structure of the temple sanctuary follows the concept of Trimandala, which has levels in the degree of sanctity, namely nista mandala or jaba pisan, madya mandala or middle jaba, and main mandala or offal.

Nista Mandala or jaba pisan is the outermost zone which is the entrance to the temple from the outside environment. This zone is usually in the form of a field or park that can be used for dance performances or preparation for various religious ceremonies. Madya Mandala or middle jaba is the middle zone where the activities of the people and supporting facilities. In this zone there are usually Bale Kulkul, Bale Gong (Bale gamelan), Wantilan (meeting Bale), Bale Pesandekan, and Perantenan.

Utama Mandala or offal is the holiest zone in the temple. Within this holiest zone are Padmasana, Pelinggih Meru, Bale Piyasan, Bale Pepelik, Bale Panggungan, Bale Pawedan, Bale Murda, and Gedong Penyimpanenan. However, the layout of the Nista Mandala and Madya Mandala zones is sometimes not absolute, because some buildings such as Bale Kulkul or Perantenan (kitchen) of the temple can also be located in the Nista mandala.

In the zone rules of temple and palace layout in Bali, both Candi bentar and Paduraksa gates are an architectural design unit. Candi bentar is the gate for the outer neighborhood that limits the outer area of the temple with Nista mandala the outer zone of the temple complex. While the Kori Agung /Gelung Agung or Paduraksa gate is used as a gate in the inner environment of the temple, and is used to limit the Madya mandala zone with the Utama mandala as the holiest area of the Balinese temple. It can be concluded that for both temple complexes and noble residences, candi bentar is used for the outer environment of the Universal Public, while paduraksa for the inner environment or Private Private.

There are several types of temples, each serving a specific function of Balinese rituals throughout the Balinese calendar. Balinese temples are organized according to the physical and spiritual world of the Balinese people, which corresponds to the sacred axis of kaja-kelod, from the mountain at the top of the world of the gods, the hyang spirits, the central fertile plains in the world of humans and other creatures, down to the beaches and oceans, and the many realms of Indonesia.

Kahyangan Jagad Temple
is a universal temple. All people of God's creation can pray there. Kahyangan Jagat temples are scattered all over the world. In Bali because it is related to a long history, Kahyangan Jagat temple is classified with several frameworks (conceptions). For example, the Rwa Bineda framework, the Catur Loka Pala framework and so on. These temples are usually located in mountainous areas of the island, built on the slopes of mountains or volcanoes. The mountains are regarded as a sacred and haunted magical world, the abode of the gods or hyang. The most important kahyangan temple in Bali is the Besakih temple complex on the slopes of Mount Agung. Another example is Pura Parahyangan Agung Jagatkarta on the slopes of Mount Salak, West Java.
Tirta Temple
also called "Water Temple", a type of temple that in addition to religious functions, also has a water management function as part of the Subak irrigation system. The priests in these temples have the authority to manage the allocation of water in the rice fields in the villages surrounding the temple. Some tirta temples are famous for their sacred water and have 'petirtaan' or sacred bathing pools for cleansing rituals. Other water temples are built within lakes, such as Pura Ulun Danu Bratan. The best example of this type of temple is Tirta Empul Temple.
Village Temple
A type of temple dedicated to the worship of Lord Brahma and the Gods, located within a village or town, serving as the center of Balinese religious activities.
Puseh Temple
A type of temple dedicated to the worship of Lord Vishnu.
Pura Dalem
A type of temple dedicated to the worship of Lord Shiva, Goddess Durga, mother earth, Banaspatiraja (barong), Sang Bhuta Diyu, Sang Bhuta Garwa, and other deities, Usually the shakti of Shiva, Goddess Durga, is honored in this temple. In the human life cycle, this temple is connected with rituals about death. It is also common for dalem temples to have large trees such as banyan or kepuh trees which are usually also used as shrines. Pura Dalem is usually located next to the graves (setra) of the ancestors before the 'ngaben' (cremation) ceremony and the place of interment.
Mrajapati Temple
A type of temple dedicated to the worship of prajapati (ruler of people) or cosmic powers. Most often, in these temples Shiva is worshipped in his form as prajapati.
Pura Segara
"Sea temple", a temple located by the sea to appease the God of the sea. It is usually important during the Melasti ritual. One example of this type of temple is Tanah Lot Temple and Uluwatu Temple.