Coconut

Coconut (Cocos nucifera) is the sole member of the genus Cocos of the palm tribe Arecaceae. The meaning of the word coconut (or coconut, in English) can refer to the entire coconut tree, seed, or fruit, which is botanically a fruiting tree, not a nut tree. The term comes from the 16th-century Portuguese and Spanish word coco meaning "head" or "skull" after the three indentations on the coconut shell that resemble facial features. The plant is utilized for almost all its parts by humans and is therefore considered a versatile plant, especially for coastal communities. Coconut is also the name for the fruit that this plant produces.

Coconuts are known for their diverse uses, ranging from food to cosmetics. The inner flesh of the mature seed forms part of what is regularly a source of food for many people in tropical and subtropical regions. Coconuts differ from other fruits in that their endosperm contains a large amount of clear liquid, called "coconut milk" in the literature, and when immature, can be harvested for drinking as "coconut water", or also called "coconut juice". The plant is thought to have originated on the coast of the Indian Ocean on the Asian side, but has now spread widely across the tropical coasts of the world.

Coconuts were first domesticated by the Austronesian peoples of the Southeast Asian Islands and spread during the Neolithic through sea migrations as far east as the Pacific Islands, and westward to Madagascar and the Comoros. They played an important role in the long sea voyages of the Austronesians by providing a portable source of food and water, as well as providing building materials for Austronesian outrigger boats. Coconuts were also later spread in historic times along the coasts of the Indian and Atlantic Oceans by South Asian, Arabian and European sailors. Based on these separate introductions, the coconut population can still be divided into Pacific coconuts and Indo-Atlantic coconuts. The coconut was introduced by Europeans to the Americas only in the colonial era in exchange with Columbus, but there is evidence of a possible pre-Columbian introduction of the Pacific coconut to Panama by Austronesian seafarers. The evolutionary origin of the coconut is still debated, with theories suggesting that it may have evolved in Asia, South America, or on the Pacific islands.

Coconuts can grow optimally in areas with rainfall of 1,300 to 2,300 mm per year, but plants can still grow even if rainfall in the planting area reaches 3,800 mm per year as long as soil drainage is good. Wind plays an important role in flower pollination (for cross pollination) and transpiration. The minimum length of irradiation for coconut is 120 hours/month to provide energy for photosynthesis. If shaded, the growth of young plants and fruit will be inhibited. Coconut grows optimally at 20-27°C and is very sensitive to low temperatures. At temperatures <15°C, physiological and morphological changes will occur in coconut plants. Coconuts will grow well at an average monthly humidity (rH) of 70-80%, and the minimum rH is 65%. If the RH is low or evapotranspiration is high, the plant will dry out and the fruit will fall early (before ripening), but if the RH is too high pests and plant diseases will easily occur. Coconut plants grow optimally in the lowlands or at an altitude of 0-450 m above sea level. At altitudes of 450-1000 m above sea level coconuts will bear fruit more slowly, produce less, and have low oil content.

Coconut plants grow on several types of soil such as alluvial, volcanic, laterite, sandy, clay, or rocky soil, but the best soil for coconut growth is on alluvial deposits. Coconuts grow well at pH 5-8, with an optimum pH of 5.5-6.5. In soils with a pH above 7.5 and no nutrient balance, coconuts often show symptoms of deficiencies, such as iron or manganese deficiency. Coconuts require a soil water content equal to the evapotranspiration rate or in other words, sufficient soil water available. Soil water balance is influenced by soil physical properties, especially structure, organic matter content and soil cover. The desired soil solum depth is at least 80-100 cm. Coconut trees require flat land with a slope of 0-3%. On land with a high slope of between 3-50%, coconut plantations should be terraced to prevent erosion, maintain soil fertility and repair eroded soil.