Weathering with You

Weathering with You (Japanese: 天気の子 Hepburn: Tenki no Ko, lit. "Son of the Weather") is an animated Japanese romantic drama fantasy film written and directed by Makoto Shinkai, known for his 2016 film Your Name. Weathering with You is set in a rainy Japan. The movie tells the story of Hodaka Morishima, a high school teenager who goes to Tokyo and befriends an orphan girl named Hina Amano, who is able to manipulate the weather. The movie is produced by CoMix Wave Films, Genki Kawamura, and Story Inc. The music was composed by Radwimps. The movie was shown in Japan on July 19, 2019. A novel adaptation, written by Shinkai, was published on July 18, 2019, the day before the movie. The novel is one of his original works. A manga adaptation illustrated by Watari Kubota began serializing in Kodansha's Afternoon magazine on July 25, six days after the film was published. The movie was selected as Japan's representative for Best International Film at the 92nd Academy Awards.

Japan is going through a period of very bad weather. A teenage girl named Hina Amano saw sunlight at a broken shrine on top of a dilapidated building while caring for her dying mother. She left her mother's bedside and went to the shrine, crossed the shrine gate, and her body was suddenly transported to the world above the sky.

High school freshman Hodaka Morishima runs away from his home on a remote island and moves to Tokyo. On the way, she almost drowns due to a terrible rainstorm that hits the ferry she is on, but is saved by a man named Keisuke Suga, who gives Hodaka his business card. In Tokyo, Hodaka struggled to support himself as he was too young to work legally. She briefly meets Hina when she eats at the fast food restaurant where Hina works. Hina, feeling sorry for her, gave her a free meal because Hodaka had eaten there for three nights in a row. Despite this, Hodaka mostly lived her days in solitude before finally finding a job as an assistant for a small publishing company that specialized in articles about urban legends with Suga, a man she met on a ferry.

Hodaka eventually reunites with Hina and learns that she has the power to create clear weather for a short period of time. Together with Hina's sister Nagi, the three of them start a business using Hina's mysterious ability to people who want clear skies for certain events. Meanwhile, Suga and his other assistant-a young woman named Natsumi, investigate the urban legends surrounding the mysterious girl who can make rainy weather turn into sunshine.

Hodaka begins to fall for Hina, but Hina's powers hold a tragic secret that will change the city of Tokyo-and its weather-forever.