Pattimura

Thomas Matulessy or Thomas Matulessia, known as Kapitan Pattimura or Pattimura (June 8, 1783 - December 16, 1817), was an Indonesian National Hero from Haria, Saparua, Maluku.

Kapitan Pattimura was born as Thomas Matulessy on June 8, 1783 in Saparua. The Matulessy family ancestors came from Seram Island. For generations they moved their ancestor Thomas Matulessy to Titawaka (now Itawaka country). Some of his descendants stayed in Itawaka, some moved to Ullath, and some moved to Haria. The one in Haria passed down the father of Yohannis and Thomas. The father of Thomas Matulessy whose name was Frans Matulessy was born in Itawaka came to Negeri Haria unmarried When the father of Thomas Matulessy settled in Negeri Haria the father of Thomas Matulessy had not returned to Itawaka and married the mother of Thomas named Fransina Silahooi who came from Siri Sori Serani. Thomas Matulessy's parents are Frans Matulessy and Fransina Silahooi, and he has an older brother named Yohannis Matulessy. "The Matulessy family is Protestant Christian. The names Yohannis and Thomas are taken from the Bible,".

After the signing of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty on August 13, 1814, in 1816, the Moluccan islands were returned to the Netherlands; Pattimura attended the ceremony. Afterwards, for violating the treaty, he and his colleagues were repatriated to their hometowns. However, Pattimura refused to accept the restoration of Dutch rule. He felt that they would stop paying indigenous Christian teachers, as the French had done in 1810, and feared that the proposed change to paper currency would leave the Moluccans unable to give alms - only coins were considered legal tender - and thus leave the churches unable to help the poor.

One by one, the assembled kapitans then tried to demonstrate the Saimbara's ability to take place. But no one was able to fulfill the request. Until one of the kapitans from Leawaka Haria was able to do so, that kapitan was Thomas Matulessy. The kapitan climbed to the tip of the spear. While standing on the tip of the unsheathed spear, the kapitan's leg bled from being stabbed by the tip of the spear. Fresh blood flowed, after which the kapitan got down from the spear, was greeted by Kapitan Said Perintah and on May 14, 1817 Thomas Matulessy was chosen as the leader of the Pattimura war troops. 

By the time this information reached Ambon, a popular uprising led by Thomas Matulessy on May 15-16, 1817 had captured Fort Duurstede and massacred Resident Johannes Rudolph van den Berg (who had only arrived two months earlier), his wife, three children and their nanny. The only Dutch survivor was Van den Berg's five-year-old son Jean Lubbert.

June 1, 1817 Successive attacks by the people were unsuccessful as the Dutch garrison at Fort Zeelandia was strengthened by the arrival of military reinforcements to Ambon. Dutch reinforcements continued to arrive complete with war equipment, then attacked Fort Duurstede which was controlled by Pattimura's troops. Because it continued to be showered with bullets and cannons, Fort Duurstede was finally abandoned by the people and returned to Dutch control. With the Dutch position getting stronger.

On the night of November 11, 1817, Pattimura and his troops were staying in a house in the booi forest. There was no conversation, just pensive silence. Suddenly there was a commotion outside and the door was opened by someone's kick. Several soldiers rushed in, pointing their guns at everyone. An officer shouted orders to surrender, pointing his gun at Pattimura's chest.

On December 16, 1817, the day of execution arrived. Early in the morning, the four leaders were ordered to prepare. There was no anxiety on the faces of Pattimura and his comrades because the day before, religious leaders had visited them and kept them company in their cells all night while praying.

On the field in front of Fort Victoria, on the Hunitetu coast of Ambon city. the hanging pole had been prepared. The executioners stood beside it, waiting for their victims to arrive. Large numbers of soldiers were stationed around the execution ground and on the beach to ward off any possible clashes. The people of Maluku had gathered, trying to see their leaders for the last time.
