Singapore

Singapore (official name: Republic of Singapore) is an island nation and city-state off the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, 137 kilometers (85 mi) north of the equator in Southeast Asia. It is separated from Malaysia by the Straits of Johor to the north, and from Indonesia's Riau Islands by the Straits of Singapore to the south. Singapore is the world's third leading financial center and a cosmopolitan world city that plays an important role in international trade and finance. The Port of Singapore is one of the five busiest ports in the world.

Singapore has a long history of immigration. Its diverse population numbers approximately 6 million, comprising Chinese, Malays, Indians, Arabs, various Asian ancestries, and Caucasians. 42% of Singaporeans are foreigners who work and study there. Foreign workers make up 50% of the service sector. The country is the second most populous in the world after Monaco. A.T. Kearney named Singapore the most globalized country in the world in its 2006 Globalization Index.

Prior to independence in 1965, Singapore was a diverse trading port with a per capita GDP of $511, the third highest in East Asia at the time. After independence, foreign direct investment and government efforts to industrialize under the plans of former Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Goh Keng Swee shaped Singapore's economy today.

Singapore is a major aviation, financial, and maritime shipping center, and has consistently been ranked as one of the most expensive cities to live in by expatriates and foreign workers. Singapore ranks highly in key social indicators: education, healthcare, quality of life, personal safety, infrastructure and housing, with a home ownership rate of 88 percent. Singaporeans enjoy one of the longest life expectancies, fastest internet connection speeds, lowest infant mortality rates, and lowest corruption rates in the world.

The Economist Intelligence Unit's "Quality of Life Index" ranks Singapore as having the best quality of life in Asia and eleventh in the world. Singapore has the ninth largest foreign exchange reserves in the world. The country also has an advanced armed forces.

The name Singapore comes from the Malay language (Sanskrit सिंहपुर "Lion City"). Today, Singapore is sometimes dubbed as the Lion City. Historical studies prove that lions probably never existed on the island; the creature seen by Sang Nila Utama, the founder and namesake of Singapore, could have been a tiger.

On January 28, 1819, Thomas Stamford Raffles landed on the main island of Singapore. He was commissioned by the British East Indian Company (EIC) to find a strategic location to build a port at the mouth of the Strait of Malacca, to counter the dominance of the Dutch, which was weakening with the successive changes of power since the bankruptcy of the VOC, the French occupation and the establishment of the Dutch Empire.

On the island, he found a Malay tribal village led by Tumenggung Abdu'r Rahman, which was the territory of the Sultanate of Johor, which at that time was in a conflict of power struggle between the Sultan of Johor Abdul Rahman and his half-brother, Tengku Hussein Shah (Tengku Long) who lived in exile in the Riau Islands. Seeing a good opportunity, both as a strategic trading post for the Southeast Asian region, as well as the opportunity to gain support from local rulers, Raffles persuaded Tumenggung Abdu'r Rahman to smuggle Tengku Hussein to Singapore, and help him seize his right to the throne of the Sultanate of Johor. After meeting Tengku Hussein, Raffles made an agreement that Britain, in this case the EIC, was willing to help Tengku Hussein seize the throne and provide annual allowances in exchange for being given special rights to build a trading post and port on the southern part of Temasek island on the east side of the present Singapore River. The agreement was signed on February 6, 1819. After the signing of this agreement, Raffles also proclaimed the new name for the city he would establish, namely Singapore.