Your Name

Your Name. (Japanese: 君の名は。; Romaji: Kimi no Na wa; literally: "Your Name.") is a 2016 Japanese anime film written and directed by Makoto Shinkai and produced by CoMix Wave Films. The character design of the movie was done by Masayoshi Tanaka, and the music creation was done by Japanese rock band Radwimps. The movie is based on Makoto Shinkai's novel of the same name released a month before the premiere about a schoolgirl in rural Japan and a student in Tokyo who exchange bodies. The movie stars Ryunosuke Kamiki, Mone Kamishiraishi, Masami Nagasawa and Etsuko Ichihara.

Your Name. was distributed by Toho and premiered at the Anime Expo 2016 convention in Los Angeles, California on July 3, 2016, and then premiered in Japan on August 26, 2016. The film was screened in Japan for an entire year, until August 25, 2017. In Indonesia, the film was shown at CGV blitz, Cinemaxx and Platinum Cineplex networks starting December 7, 2016.

The film received good widespread reception from critics who praised the film for its animation and emotional impact, as well as its commercial success by becoming the fourth highest-grossing film of all time in Japan, the seventh highest-grossing traditional animated film, and the highest-grossing anime film of all time worldwide, with total revenues reaching US$355 million as of July 30, 2017. It also won the 49th Sitges Film Festival, the 2016 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards, and the 71st Mainichi Film Awards for Best Animated Feature, and was nominated for the 40th Japan Academy Prize for Best Animation of the Year.

Mitsuha Miyamizu, a high school student living in a fictitious village called Itomori in the mountainous Hida area of Gifu Prefecture, is getting bored with her life in the countryside where she was born and hopes to be born into a handsome young man living in Tokyo in her next life. Then, Taki Tachibana, a high school student living in Tokyo, wakes up from his sleep and realizes that he is Mitsuha, who somehow got into Taki's body.

Taki and Mitsuha realized that they were both entering each other's bodies. They began to communicate with each other by leaving notes on paper and memos on their cell phones. As time goes by, they get more and more used to this exchange of bodies and begin to interfere in each other's lives. Mitsuha helped Taki to establish a relationship with a female coworker named Miki Okudera, so that Taki could eventually date Miki. Meanwhile, Taki helps Mitsuha to be better known at his school. Mitsuha then tells Taki about a comet that is predicted to pass close to Earth in the coming days, and how interested she is to be able to see it, because the timing coincides with a festival in Itomori Village.

At some point, Mitsuha's grandmother asked Taki inside Mitsuha's body, "You're still dreaming, right?", and told him that Miyamizu descendants sometimes have dreams about other people's lives. The next day, Taki suddenly woke up in his own body again. When he meets Miki, his date ends in failure. Miki left Taki, saying that she realized that there was someone else Taki was thinking about. Since then, Taki and Mitsuha have never swapped bodies again. Taki then tried to contact Mitsuha, but to no avail. He finally decided to meet Mitsuha in person by visiting her birthplace.

Without knowing what Mitsuha's village was called and where it was located, Taki traveled to various areas of Hida, relying solely on sketches of the village scenery that he drew based on his memories. Finally, at a restaurant he visits with Miki and his schoolmate Tsukasa Fujii, a waiter recognizes Taki's sketch as Itomori Village, and says that the village used to be very beautiful. But now the village and the surrounding area have been destroyed and turned into a giant crater after being hit by the fragments of the comet Tiamat that fell three years ago. While reading the records of the incident, Taki realized that this incident had killed a third of the population. Taki also finds Mitsuha's name as well as her two friends, Katsuhiko Teshigawara and Sayaka Natori, on the list of victims. Taki was then escorted by the servant to the crater site. There, Taki looked for the memo Mitsuha had made on her cell phone to make sure she wasn't dreaming. But apparently everything has disappeared.

Trying to reconnect with Mitsuha, Taki then ventured alone to Mitsuha's family shrine located on a mountain near Itomori. Realizing that his and Mitsuha's timelines were actually several years apart during this time, Taki drank kuchikami-zake, a type of rice wine made by chewing rice in the mouth, which Mitsuha had made while undergoing the shrine maiden tradition and left in the shrine as an offering. She hoped to reconnect with Mitsuha's body before the comet hit. Taki manages to awaken in Mitsuha's body on the morning of the festival, and realizes that he still has time to save the village. He convinces Mitsuha's friends about the comet and enlists their help to evacuate the village. While going through his plan, Taki realizes that Mitsuha is also trying to find him by taking the train to Tokyo, and may now be in his body inside the shrine. Taki then revisits the mountain where the shrine is located to meet Mitsuha.

Previously, Mitsuha could not find Taki in Tokyo and returned to her village feeling sad. On the way, Mitsuha then met and recognized Taki. But because his timeline is actually in the past, Taki cannot recognize him. Now Mitsuha wakes up in Taki's body inside his family shrine, then climbs to the top of the mountain. Taki has also arrived at the top of the mountain. Although they can feel each other's existence, they cannot see each other because they are in different times. As the sun began to set, both Taki and Mitsuha realized that it was kataware time, so they returned to their respective bodies, and could see each other. Taki reminds Mitsuha to convince his father who is the Mayor of Itomori to evacuate the entire village. They also decided to write their names on each other's hands so that they wouldn't forget them when they returned to their respective original timelines after sunset. Before Mitsuha could write his name, the sun had already set, and they were separated again. As time passed, their memories slowly began to fade, and eventually they could no longer remember each other's names and the events they had experienced. In a last ditch effort, Mitsuha opened her palm, and realized what Taki had written was not her name, but "I love you". Full of confidence and renewed vigor, Mitsuha returns to see his father before the comet fragments fall and hit Itomori.

Suga Shrine Stairs
Eight years later, it was revealed that Mitsuha managed to persuade her father to evacuate the residents of the surrounding district so that the residents of Itomori Village were saved in time. Meanwhile, Taki, who has graduated from university and is looking for a job, has a feeling that something is missing in him. He finds himself attracted to things related to Itomori, such as magazines and residents he feels familiar with, who he had actually met while in Mitsuha's body. While traveling on separate trains, Taki and Mitsuha were stunned to see each other when the two trains passed each other. They then got off at the next stop to look for each other. Eventually they met each other on a staircase, and since they felt like they knew each other, they asked each other their names.