Mount Merbabu

Mount Merbabu (Hanacaraka: ꦒꦸꦤꦸꦁꦩꦼꦂꦧꦧꦸ) is a strato-type volcano (see Volcano) located geographically at 7.5° N and 110.4° E. It is administratively located in Magelang Regency on the western slopes and Boyolali Regency on the eastern and southern slopes, Semarang Regency on the northern slopes, Central Province. Administratively, the mountain is located in Magelang Regency on the western slopes and Boyolali Regency on the eastern and southern slopes, Semarang Regency on the northern slopes, Central Java Province.

Mount Merbabu is known through pre-Islamic texts as Mount Damalung or Mount Pam(a)rihan. On its slopes there was once a famous hermitage and it was visited by Bujangga Manik in the 15th century. According to etymology, "merbabu" comes from the combination of the words "meru" (mountain) and "abu" (ash). This name only appeared in Dutch records.

The mountain erupted in 1560 and 1797. It was also reported to have erupted in 1570, but no further confirmation or research has been done. The peak of Mount Merbabu is 3,145 meters above sea level.

Mount Merbabu has areas of Hill Dipterocarp Forest, Upper Dipterocarp Forest, Montane Forest, and Ericaceous forest or mountain forest.

Hiking Trails
Mount Merbabu is quite popular as a venue for climbing activities. The terrain is not too strenuous but the potential dangers that climbers must pay attention to are cold air, thick fog, dense but homogeneous forests (coniferous forests, which are not sufficient to support survival), and the absence of water sources. Respect for local traditions also needs to be taken into consideration.

Kopeng Thekelan Trail
From Jakarta, you can take a train or bus to Semarang, Yogyakarta, or Solo. Continue by bus to Solo-Semarang and get off at Salatiga city, followed by a small bus to Kopeng. From Yogyakarta take a bus to Magelang, followed by a small bus to Kopeng. From Kopeng, there are many routes to Puncak, but it is better to pass through Tekelan village because there is a post that can provide information and various assistance needed. Tekelan post can be reached through Umbul Songo campground.

At Umbul Songo campground you can rest waiting for nightfall, because climbing will be better done at night arriving at the peak before sunrise. You can also rest at Thekelan Post which provides a place to sleep, especially if you don't bring a tent. You can also camp at the Pending Post because you can get clean water in these three places.

The majority of people around Merbabu are Buddhist, so you will find several monasteries around Kopeng. People often meditate or meditate and many places leading to the summit are sacred. Climbers should not defecate in Watu Gubug and around the crater. Also climbers are not allowed to wear red and green clothes.

On the Javanese New Year 1 Suro, people perform a traditional ceremony in the crater of Mount Merbabu. In Sapar, the people of Selo (south slope of Merbabu) hold a traditional ceremony. Female children in Tekelan village are left with dreadlocks to protect themselves and to gain safety. The trek from Tekelan Post, which is located in the center of the village, begins by passing through the villagers' gardens and pine forests. From here we can see a beautiful view of Mount Telomoyo and Rawa Pening.

At Pending Post climbers can find a spring, also we will find a small river (Kali Sowo). Before reaching Post I climbers will pass Pereng Putih and must be careful because the road is very steep. Then climbers pass through a dry river, from here the view is very beautiful down to see Salatiga city especially at night.

From Post I we will pass through a mixed forest to Post II, towards Post III the path begins to open and the road begins to climb steeply. Climbing Mount Pertapan, the strong wind is very noticeable, especially in the open. Climbers can take refuge in Watu Gubug, a hollow rock that can be entered by 5 people. It is said to be the gateway to the kingdom of supernatural beings.

If there is a storm, you should not continue the journey because it is very dangerous. Approaching post four climbers climbing Mount Watu Tulis the path is rather steep and a lot of sand and small pebbles so slippery, strong winds carry dust and sand so you have to be ready to close your eyes if there is a strong wind. Post IV, which is at the top of Mount Watu Tulis with an altitude of 2,896 meters above sea level, is also called the Transmitter Post because at the top there is a Radio Transmitter.

Towards Post V the path is downhill, this post is surrounded by beautiful hills and cliffs. Climbers can descend to the Condrodimuko crater. And here there is a spring, distinguish between drinking water and sulfur water.

The journey continues by passing a very steep climb and ravines on the left and right sides. This incline is called the Devil's Bridge. Then climbers will come to an intersection, to the left towards Syarif Peak (Mount Pregodalem) and to the right towards the elongated Kenteng Songo peak (Mount Kenteng Songo).

From the top of Kenteng Songo, climbers can see Mount Merapi with its peak puffing smoke at any time, looking very close. To the west, Mount Sumbing and Mount Sindoro look very clear and beautiful. Even closer are Mount Telomoyo and Mount Ungaran. In the distance to the east is Mount Lawu with its elongated peak.

Towards Kenteng Songo Peak, the path is very dangerous, besides being narrow only about 1 meter wide with the left and right sides of the rocky ravine without trees, also the wind is very strong ready to push climbers at any time. On this peak there are kenteng / mortar / hollow stones with a total of 9 according to paranormal vision.

Descending Mount Merbabu via the route to Selo is an interesting option. Hikers will pass through meadows and edelweiss forests, as well as beautiful flowering hills. Along the way hikers can see Mount Merapi, which looks very close to the peak that always emits smoke.

Hikers will descend and climb several small mountains covered with green grass without trees to shelter from the wind. Along the trail there are no springs and resting posts. Fog and storms often appear suddenly, making it very dangerous to pitch a tent.

The paths to Selo are numerous and there are no signposts, making it very confusing for hikers. Many paths are often traveled by residents to look for grass at the top of the mountain, so climbers will arrive at the village of the population.

From Selo, you can continue with a small bus to Boyolali-Magelang, if you want to go to Yogya, take the Magelang route, and if you want to go to Semarang or Solo, take the Boyolali route.

Wekas Trail
To get to Wekas village, we have to take a car from Kopeng to Magelang and get off at Kaponan, which is about 9 km from Kopeng, precisely in front of the gate of Wekas village. From Kaponan hikers walk through the rocky road for about 3 km to the hiking post.

This route is very popular among teenagers and nature lovers of Magelang city, because it is closer and there are many water sources, so many teenagers like to camp at Post II especially on holidays. Wekas is the last village to the summit which takes approximately 6-7 hours. The wekas trail is a short trail so there are rarely flat stretches. The track at Post I is quite wide with underlying rocks. Along the way you will find typical highland fields planted with onions, cabbage, carrots, and tobacco, as well as rabbits whose droppings are used as fertilizer. The route to post I is quite uphill with a travel time of 2 hours. The path starts from traveling along the fields. After about 500 meters of climbing, you will reach the Tomb of the Village Elder as the boundary between the residents' fields and the pine forest.

Post I is a plain with a hall as a resting place. Post I is about 1.5 km from the basecamp. before reaching Post I climbers will meet Post I Shadow which is marked with a signboard. Post I Shadow is an open land that can be used for resting and camping. there is no water source either at Post I or post I shadow. Travel time to post II is 2 hours, with the path continuing to climb steeply.

Post II is an open and flat place, where up to several dozens of tents are usually set up. On Saturdays, Sundays and holidays Pos II is widely used by teenagers for camping. So that on these days many residents sell food. In this area there is a water source that is channeled through large pipes that are collected in a tub. There are 4 toilets at Post II.

From Post II there is a dead-end path that leads to a river that is used as a water source for the community around Wekas to the surrounding villages. This path follows the flow of water pipes along the edge of the ravine that leads to the river below the crater. There are two very steep streams that form cascading waterfalls, making for an extraordinary sight against the backdrop of a collection of peaks - the peaks of Mount Merbabu.

After post II, the trail begins to open up until it meets the Kopeng trail junction above post V (Watu Tulis), Kopeng trail. From this intersection to the Helipad post only takes 15 minutes. The journey continues by passing through a very steep incline and ravines on the left and right sides. This incline is called the Devil's Bridge. Then we will arrive at the intersection, to the left towards Syarif Peak (Mount Pregodalem) and to the right towards the elongated Kenteng Songo peak (Mount Kenteng Songo).

Kopeng Cunthel Trail
To get to Cuntel village, you can take a mini bus from Salatiga city and get off at Kopeng tourist area, precisely at Umbul Songo campground. The journey begins by walking along a rather wide rocky path for 2.5 km, on the left is Umbul Songo Campground. After passing Umbul Songo turn to the left, on the left is a pine forest after walking about 500 meters on the left there is a path towards the pine forest, this path leads to Thekelan village.

To get to Cuntel village, continue following the rocky road to the end. There are many directional signs both around the village and on the hiking trail. At the Cuntel Village Basecamp in the center of the village, hikers can rest and replenish water supplies. Hikers can also buy various memorable items in the form of stickers and t-shirts.

After leaving the village, the journey continues by crossing the residents' plantations. The path begins to climb up the hills, which are overgrown with pine trees. The path is dry soil that is dusty, especially in the dry season, so it disturbs the eyes and breathing. For this reason, hikers should use protective masks and glasses.

After walking for about 30 minutes along the winding hill, hikers will arrive at the Bayangan I post. In this place climbers can take shelter from the sun and rainwater. By crossing a path that is still similar, namely along a dusty road interspersed with pine trees, about 30 minutes will arrive at Shadow Post II. In this post there is also a roofed building to rest.

From Post I to the Transmitter post the path begins to open up, on the left and right of the path is overgrown with reeds. Meanwhile, some pine trees still grow in a distance.

The transmitter post or often called Watu Tulis mountain is at an altitude of 2,896 meters above sea level. At its peak there is a relay transmitter station. In this post there are many large stones so that it can be used to shelter from strong winds. However, strong winds sometimes come from below bringing flying dust. Climbing during the day will feel very hot. From this location the view downwards is very beautiful, looking in the distance Mount Sumbing and Mount Sindoro, looking Mount Ungaran behind Mount Telomoyo.

The next path is a descent to the Helipad Post, the atmosphere and scenery around the Helipad Post is truly extraordinary. On the right lies Mount Kukusan, whose peak is white like sulfur vomit that has dried up. In front of the eye lies a whitish crater. On the right near the crater is a spring, climbers must be able to distinguish between drinking water and sulfur water.

The journey continues by passing a very steep climb and ravines on the left and right sides. This incline is called the Devil's Bridge. Then we will arrive at the intersection, to the left towards Syarif Peak (Mount Pregodalem) and to the right towards the elongated Kenteng Songo peak (Mount Kenteng Songo).

From the top of Kenteng Songo we can see Mount Merapi with its peak puffing smoke at any time, looking very close. To the west, Mt. Sumbing and Sindoro look very clear and beautiful, as if they are challenging to climb. Even closer are Mt.Telomoyo and Mt.Ungaran. In the distance to the east is Mt.Lawu with its elongated peak.

The savannah is one of the reasons for the large number of visitors in Mount Merbabu National Park, but the large number of visitors also has an impact on the erosion that occurs along the Selo hiking trail.
Selo Trail
The Merbabu hiking trail via Selo is currently a relatively more crowded trail than the other trails. The beautiful scenery with the savanna makes the trip more enjoyable. Plus from this path Merbabu's close neighbor Merapi can be seen clearly.

Access to the location is Yogyakarta or Solo, if from Solo take a bus majoring in Semarang down in Boyolali city. If from the city of Yogyakarta, you must take the Solo bus to get off at Kartasura, then change the Solo Semarang bus to get off at Boyolali city. To get to Selo from Boyolali town, take a small bus to Selo. Buses that go directly to Selo are rather rare usually only up to Cepogo Market, and from Cepogo market change again small buses that go to Selo. From Boyolali town, this small bus to Selo does not park at Boyolali terminal. Hikers have to walk a little to Pasar Sapi where the small bus to Cepogo/Selo stops for passengers.

At the beginning of the hike, climbers will be greeted by a welcome gate from the Mount Merbabu National Park. Entering the forest gate, the road is lined with pine and lamtoro trees on either side, making it cool during the day. The road is still quite gentle for up to 15 minutes. After walking for 1-1.5 hours you arrive at post 1 (Dok Malang). This post is still in the lush trees.

After post 1, the track does not feel steep enough, there is one fairly steep climb and at the top is the shadow post. Only after walking 20 minutes from the shadow post will climbers arrive at post 2 (pandean) the distance from post 1-2 is arguably long.

Furthermore, the distance between posts 2 and 3 is not far. About 45 minutes walk, climbers will arrive at post 3 (Watu Tulis) the scenery here is quite beautiful with Merapi quite clear if not foggy. Coupled with the lush edelweiss trees. It is best to rest a little longer at this post 3.

Towards post 4 (Sabana 1) climbers will be faced with a track that is enough to make their breath hitch. The track is steep with soil that easily makes slipping. Choose the path slightly to the left because on the left you can get a grip.

Sabana 1 is one of the interesting places to camp, the flat place and beautiful scenery may be the reason hikers choose to set up their tents here. However, the wind in this place is quite strong, moreover it is very prone to storms.

From savannah 1 to get to savannah 2 (post 5) does not take long. About 40 minutes only. The track is a slightly steep climb although not as steep as between post 3-post 4 but the wind is quite strong at night in this place. after reaching the top of the hill we will walk downhill and arrive at post 5 (savanna 2). Although the wind still feels big, I think this is the right place to set up a tent.

If you want to enjoy the sunrise at the top, you should start waking up at 3 am to prepare breakfast and do a summit attack. Travel time to the summit is about 1 - 1.5 hours. If you are lazy to get up early, you can enjoy the sunrise on the hill east of the savanna. The advantage of this route is that the sunrise can be enjoyed along the hiking trail.

Note: for climbers who ascend from the Selo route, drinking water needs must be brought from below / basecamp because along the way to the summit there is no water source.

Landscape of the southwest side of Mount Merbabu National Park. Mount Merbabu is famous for its beautiful grasslands, often referred to as 'savannah', but with the increase in visitors, the beauty of this savannah is also in danger of being damaged.
Suwanting Trail
Suwanting Trail is a trail that was opened in 1990 and 1998, but after 1998 this trail was closed for climbing and only in early 2015 was this trail reopened.

This hiking trail is located in Suwanting Hamlet, Banyuroto Village, Sawangan Sub-district, Magelang Regency, which is about 5 km from Ketep Pass viewpoint. If departing from the city of Yogyakarta, it takes two hours of travel using a two-wheeled vehicle.

The Mount Merbabu Hiking Trail via Suwanting is famous for its beautiful savanna scenery that attracts mountain climbers. This route has three posts (Lempong Valley Post, Flag Selter Post, and Ndampo Awang Post). Climbers can set up tents at post 2 and post 3 because the location is quite spacious and the view is really beautiful with Mount Merapi in the background.

On this path hikers do not need to worry about water shortages, because along the hiking trail there are three water posts that can be used for consumption, the water post is located below Cemoro Valley, Manding Valley and finally under post 3.

After post 3, climbers will pass through the soothing savanna. If visiting in the rainy season or the range of May - August, climbers will find green grasslands.