Mount Muria

Mount Muria (known in colonial times as Moerija or Moerjo) is a stratovolcano-type mountain, located on the north coast of Central Java, about 66 kilometers northeast of Semarang City. The mountain is included in the Jepara City area on the west side, Kudus City area on the south side, and Pati City area on the east side and southeast of Grobogan City and Todanan City of Kendeng Mountain Range. The mountain has an altitude of 1602 meters above sea level, but other sources state that the height is 1625 meters above sea level.

The mountain was once a separate island, separated from Java by the Muria Strait. This strait became one of the spice trade routes connecting the Middle East with the Moluccas and was probably traversed by Tomé Pires on his journey in Java. The strait was closed sometime between the 17th and 18th centuries.

The Muria area is famous for several reasons. It contains the grave sites of two of Java's Wali Sanga, namely Sunan Muria, also known as Raden Umar Said, whose grave is in Colo on the southern slope of Mount Muria, and Sunan Kudus, also known as Ja'far Shadiq, whose grave is in the town of Kudus to the south of Mount Muria. Wali Sanga are nine Islamic saints who are associated with the origins of Islam in Java. The tomb is therefore part of a network of sites in Java that are considered holy. The name Kudus means "holy".

Since the 1970s, the northern side of the mountain was chosen by the National Nuclear Energy Agency (BATAN) as the site for a nuclear power plant, citing its low risk of natural disasters compared to other areas in Java and Bali. However, several earthquakes around the mountain since the 2010s have caused the plan to be canceled.

Illustration of Mount Muria and Mount Genuk by Natuurkundig Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië in 1887. Mount Muria is one of the mountains in Java associated with a Miocene-aged subduction zone, rather than an active subduction zone (such as Mount Merapi or Mount Kelud), with the Wadati-Benioff Zone being about 400 kilometers deep. Nonetheless, magmatic activity was at least known to still exist beneath the mountain in 2000.

In April 1975, BATAN and the Department of Public Works formed a commission to begin the process of selecting the location of the PLTN site, called the Commission for the Preparation of PLTN Development (KP2PLTN). The commission consisted of BATAN, the Department of Public Works, the Department of Defense and Security, the Department of Home Affairs, the Department of Education and Culture, and PLN. The selection resulted in 5 out of 14 proposed locations. The five locations are Tanjung Pujut (Banten), Parigi (West Java), Lasem (Central Java), Muria (Central Java), and Situbondo (East Java).

Between July and September 1975, a survey was conducted to determine the best site location from the five. The results were two locations, namely Keling in Muria and Sluke in Lasem. Then, BATAN conducted a feasibility study of the two locations assisted by the Italian nuclear engineering firm, NIRA. The results of the study came out in 1982, which concluded that Ujungwatu in Keling (now part of Donorojo) was the best candidate site.

In 1991, an agreement was made between the Ministry of Finance and BATAN with a Japanese energy consulting company, NEWJEC Inc. This agreement essentially contracted NEWJEC for four and a half years to analyze and evaluate the site. The original Ujungwatu site was updated to six sites, namely Ujungwatu, Ujung Bantungan, Ujung Grenggengan, Ujung Lemahabang, Ujung Bayuran and Ujung Piring. The final choice fell on Ujung Lemahabang (ULA), a hamlet in Balong, Kembang Subdistrict, Jepara Regency. In 1993, NEWJEC issued a report entitled Feasibility Study of the First Nuclear Power Plants at Muria Peninsula Region. The report projected the supply and demand for nuclear energy and advised the Indonesian government to build 12 600-megawatt reactors. Site selection was finally completed in May 1996, and the plan was to start construction in 1997, but was delayed due to the 1997 Asian financial crisis.

In 2007, there was widespread opposition to this plan from residents of Jepara (including those in Balong) and Kudus by holding demonstrations in various places. This rejection was also followed by entrepreneurs who lived around the mountain by threatening to leave the place if the nuclear power plant was built. Some academics say that these protests were caused by the issuance of Presidential Regulation No. 5/2006, which is considered to be full of political and economic interests.

On September 2, 2007, Nahdlatul Ulama Jepara specifically forbade the construction of nuclear power plants on the Muria Peninsula, arguing that nuclear power plants could only supply 2-4 percent of national energy needs while the radioactive waste discharged could be harmful to the environment. However, they emphasized that this decision only applies there. The decision was supported by environmental organizations such as Greenpeace and Walhi, and the PKB political party.

Following the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster, residents of Jepara held another rally and organized solidarity actions for the Japanese people affected by the disaster. This event also made residents of Bangka Belitung protest against the nuclear power plant that was planned to be built there. Nevertheless, BATAN stated to continue the construction of nuclear power plants in both regions. In 2015, this plan was permanently canceled due to several known earthquakes around the mountain.