Mount Lawu

Mount Lawu (Hanacaraka: ꦒꦸꦤꦸꦁꦭꦮꦸ) is a non-active volcano located on the island of Java, precisely on the border of Central Java and East Java, Indonesia. Mount Lawu has an altitude of about 3,265 meters above sea level. Mount Lawu is located between three districts, namely Karanganyar in Central Java, Ngawi, and Magetan in East Java. The status of this mountain is a "resting" volcano, which is estimated to have last erupted on November 28, 1885 and has long been inactive, as seen from the dense vegetation and eroded peaks. A 2019 study on geothermal heat flow suggests that Mount Lawu is still active today. Mount Lawu is one of the coldest mountains in Java, after Mount Semeru, and Mount Slamet which is the coldest point in Java.

Mount Lawu is the home of the god Parwatarajadewa (also called Hyang Girinatha in the Serat Centhini manuscript). The New Javanese text Serat Manikmaya states that Mount Lawu is part of the eighteen sacred mountains in Central Java, and scholars agree that the mountain has great religious significance for Hindus in Java.

There are a number of popular tourist destinations on the slopes of the mountain, especially in the areas of Tawangmangu, Cemorosewu and Sarangan. Slightly lower down, on the western side are two temple complexes from the late Majapahit period, namely Sukuh Temple and Cetho Temple. At the foot of the mountain is also the Mangkunagaran family cemetery: Astana Girilayu and Astana Mangadeg. Nearby is Astana Giribangun, the mausoleum for the family of Indonesia's second president, Soeharto.

Poerbatjaraka mentions that the original name of Mount Lawu was Katong, which means god. The name is written in the Tantu Panggelaran. Mount Katong was part of the ruins of Mount Mahameru when it was carried by the gods through the skies of Java Island. The other ruins became Mount Wilis, Kamput, Kawi, Arjuno and Kemukus. According to Poerbatjaraka, Mount Katong is identified with Mount Lawu. In other words, Mount Katong is an ancient name for Mount Lawu.

The nature of Parwatarajadewa can be interpreted as a personified mountain God, and not one of the more dominant Gods at the time, such as Lord Shiva, but widely revered and considered a "National God".

Apart from Serat Centhini, the name Lawu is also mentioned in Serat Manikmaya. It was written in 1794 AD, and its content is similar to that of Tantu Panggelaran. However, the difference is that Serat Manikmaya is written in the New Javanese language. It is said that Mount Lawu is part of the eighteen sacred mountains in Central Java. It is likely that the mandalas were located in the mountains where the literary work was created.

An older literary work is the Babad Tanah Jawi. In the book, Mount Lawu is mentioned as the final moksa place of Prabu Brawijaya who has another name, Sunan Gunung Lawu. The myth that developed in the community states that he performed his moksa in the hermitage of Pringgodani.[9] This statement is an indication that until the time of writing Babad Tanah Jawi, namely during the Islamic Mataram period, Mount Lawu was still seen as a sacred place. At the very least, it was a mountain that was considered precious by Hindus.

The oldest manuscript is Bhujangga Manik. Mount Lawu is also mentioned when Bhujangga Manik traveled from Sunda to Majapahit and Bali. Here is an excerpt from the manuscript.