Bali

Bali (also known as the Bali Islands, Balinese: ᬩᬮᬶ) is a province located in Indonesia. Its capital city is Denpasar. Bali Province is located in the western part of the Nusa Tenggara Islands. At the beginning of Indonesian independence, the island was included in the Lesser Sunda Province with the capital in Singaraja, and is now divided into 3 provinces, namely Bali, West Nusa Tenggara, and East Nusa Tenggara. In 2020, the population of Bali province was 4,317,404 people, with a density of 747 people/km2.

Bali Island is part of the Lesser Sunda Islands, 153 km long and 112 km wide, about 3.2 km from Java Island. Geographically, Bali is located at 8°25′23″ South latitude and 115°14′55″ East longitude which makes it tropical like the rest of Indonesia.

Mount Agung is the highest point in Bali at 3,148m. The volcano last erupted in March 1963. Mount Batur is also one of the mountains in Bali. About 30,000 years ago, Mount Batur erupted and produced a catastrophic disaster on earth. Unlike the north, the south of Bali is a low-lying area fed by rivers.

Based on the relief and topography, in the middle of Bali Island lies a mountain range that extends from west to east and between the mountains there are clusters of volcanoes, namely Mount Batur and Mount Agung and non-volcanic mountains, namely Mount Merbuk, Mount Patas and Mount Seraya. The existence of these mountains causes Bali to be geographically divided into 2 (two) unequal parts, namely North Bali with a narrow and less sloping lowland and South Bali with a wide and sloping lowland. The land slope of Bali Island consists of flat land (0-2%) covering 122,652 ha, undulating land (2-15%) covering 118,339 ha, steep land (15-40%) covering 190,486 ha and very steep land (>40%) covering 132,189 ha. Bali Province has 4 (four) lakes located in mountainous areas, namely Lake Beratan or Bedugul, Buyan, Tamblingan, and Batur. Bali's beautiful nature makes the island famous as a tourist area.

Japan occupied Bali during World War II and at that time a military officer named I Gusti Ngurah Rai formed an army of Balinese 'freedom fighters'. Following Japan's surrender in the Pacific in August 1945, the Dutch immediately returned to Indonesia (including Bali) to re-establish its colonial rule as it was before the war. This was opposed by the Balinese resistance forces who were using Japanese weapons at the time.

Three decades ago, Bali's economy was largely reliant and based on agriculture in terms of both output and employment. Now, the tourism industry is the biggest object of income for Bali. As a result, Bali has become one of the richest regions in Indonesia. In 2003, about 80% of Bali's economy depended on the tourism industry. At the end of June 2011, the non-performing loan of all banks in Bali was 2.23%, lower than the average non-performing loan of the Indonesian banking industry (around 5%). The economy, however, suffered significantly as a result of the 2002 Bali Bombings and the 2005 Bali Bombings. The tourism industry itself has recovered from the aftermath of these events. After the Covid-19 Pandemic at the end of 2019, Bali's economy, which is dominated by the Tourism sector, experienced a decline. However, the agricultural sector is one of the main pillars of the economy in the province of Bali.

Based on data from the Central Statistics Agency (BPS) of Bali province in 2021, the population of Bali is 4,317,404 people (2020) with the majority of Balinese ethnicity. Data from the Ministry of Religious Affairs noted that 86.91% of Bali province residents adhere to Hinduism. Other religions are Islam (10.05%), Protestant Christianity (1.56%), Catholicism (0.79%), Buddhism (0.68%), Confucianism (0.01%), and Belief (less than 0.01%).

The Balinese people are generally Hindu. The Javanese, Sundanese, Sasak, Malay, are generally Muslim, and some indigenous Balinese also embrace Islam. Christians are generally from East Nusa Tenggara, then Papua, Batak, Minahasa, and Chinese. And there is also one village, Blimbing Sari village in Melaya sub-district of Jembrana, not far from Gilimanuk Harbor, a Christian village where the residents are native Balinese, even the church looks like a temple.

The general beliefs and practices of Agama Hindu Dharma mix ancient traditions and contemporary pressures placed by Indonesian laws that permit only monotheist belief under the national ideology of Pancasila. Traditionally, Hinduism in Indonesia had a pantheon of deities and that tradition of belief continues in practice; further, Hinduism in Indonesia granted freedom and flexibility to Hindus as to when, how and where to pray. However, officially, the Indonesian government considers and advertises Indonesian Hinduism as a monotheistic religion with certain officially recognised beliefs that comply with its national ideology. Indonesian school textbooks describe Hinduism as having one supreme being, Hindus offering three daily mandatory prayers, and Hinduism as having certain common beliefs that in part parallel those of Islam. Scholars contest whether these Indonesian government recognised and assigned beliefs to reflect the traditional beliefs and practices of Hindus in Indonesia before Indonesia gained independence from Dutch colonial rule.

Balinese Hinduism has roots in Indian Hinduism and Buddhism, which arrived through Java. Hindu influences reached the Indonesian Archipelago as early as the first century. Historical evidence is unclear about the diffusion process of cultural and spiritual ideas from India. Java legends refer to Saka-era, traced to 78 AD. Stories from the Mahabharata Epic have been traced in Indonesian islands to the 1st century; however, the versions mirror those found in the southeast Indian peninsular region (now Tamil Nadu and southern Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh).