English language

English is a Germanic language first spoken in England in the Early Middle Ages and is today the most commonly spoken language worldwide. English is spoken as a first language by the majority of the population in many countries, including the United Kingdom, Ireland, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and a number of Caribbean countries; as well as being an official language in nearly 60 sovereign states. English is the third most widely spoken native language worldwide, after Mandarin and Spanish. It is also used as a second language and official language by the European Union, Commonwealth countries, and the United Nations, among other organizations.

English first developed in the Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms of England and in the area that currently forms southeast Scotland. After the expansion of British influence in the 17th and 20th centuries through the British Empire, English became widespread throughout the world. In addition, the widespread use of English was also due to the spread of American culture and technology, which dominated throughout the 20th century. These things have led to English today becoming the main language and unofficially (de facto) considered as the lingua franca in various parts of the world.

Modern English grammar is the result of a gradual change from a typical Indo-European dependent marking pattern with rich inflectional morphology and relatively free word order to a largely analytic pattern with little inflection and fairly fixed subject-verb-object word order. Modern English relies more on auxiliary verbs and word order to express complex verb forms, aspect and mood, as well as passive constructions, interrogatives, and some negation.

Historically, English originated as a fusion of various related dialects, now collectively known as Old English, which were brought to the east coast of the island of Great Britain by Germanic settlers (Anglo-Saxons) in the 5th century; the word 'English' comes from the name of the Angles. These Anglo-Saxons themselves originated from the region of Angeln (present-day Schleswig-Holstein, Germany). Early English was also influenced by Old Norse after the Vikings conquered England in the 9th and 10th centuries.

The Norman conquest of England in the 11th century led to English also being influenced by Norman French, and vocabulary and spelling in English began to be influenced by Roman Latin (although English itself is not a Romance language family), which became known as Middle English. The Vowel Shift that began in southern England in the 15th century is one of the historical events that marked the transition of Middle English into Modern English. 

In addition to Anglo-Saxons and Norman French, a large number of English words also have Latin roots, as Latin was the lingua franca of the Christian Church and the primary language of European intellectuals, and has been the vocabulary basis for modern English. Because it has experienced a diverse blend of words from various languages throughout history, modern English has a very large vocabulary, with complex and irregular spellings, especially of vowels. Modern English is not only a blend of European languages, but also of languages from around the world. The Oxford English Dictionary lists more than 250,000 different words, not including a huge number of technical, scientific and slang terms.


English is the majority native language in the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the Republic of Ireland (see Anglosphere) and is widely spoken in some areas of the Caribbean, Africa, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Oceania. It is the co-official language of the United Nations, the European Union, and many other international and regional organisations. English accounts for at least 70% of speakers of the Germanic language branch of the Indo-European family.