Children

Children Who Chase Lost Voices (Japanese: 星を追う子ども Hepburn: Hoshi o Ou Kodomo, literally: "Children Who Chase Lost Voices") is a 2011 Japanese animated feature film fantasy adventure for teenagers written and directed by Makoto Shinkai and produced by CoMix Wave Films. The character design of the movie was done by Takayo Nishimura and the music composition was done by Tenmon. The animation art director was Tanji Takumi.

Children Who Chase Lost Voices is distributed by Sentai Filmworks and was released in Japan on May 7, 2011. Children Who Chase Lost Voices was also broadcast on Toonami on November 5, 2016, which makes it the first Japanese animated film since 2014 to be broadcast on Toonami, Makoto Shinkai's first work to be broadcast on Toonami and the third title from Sentai Filmworks to be broadcast on Toonami.The film received six nominations from several renowned events and won the 2012 Tokyo Anime Award for Best Art Direction by Takumi Tanji.

Asuna Watase is a high school student. Her father died when she was young, and her mother works long shifts as a nurse. Despite being an excellent student at school and good at household chores, she still finds time to come to her secret hilltop hideout, and uses the unique crystal her father left behind to listen to the radio station. She then listens to the strange melody that has always been with her, close to her heart.

One day, while walking to her clubhouse across a bridge, she is attacked by a fearsome creature and saved by a mysterious teenage boy who calls himself Shun. Asuna treats Shun's wound from fighting the creature and later they both listen to Asuna's radio. Shun tells Asuna he is from another country called Agartha and that he came to this place to find something. He then gives Asuna a blessing in the form of a kiss to the forehead. Asuna leaves hurriedly and tells Shun she'll be back tomorrow. Shun, now alone, looks up at the stars and falls from the ledge to his death.

The next morning, Asuna hears from her mother that a boy was found dead in the river, but refuses to believe it's Shun. In school, Mr. Morisaki, a substitute teacher, is giving a lecture on a book which grabs Asuna's attention when he mentions Agartha, the land of the dead. After school, she visits Morisaki and asks him about Agartha. Morisaki explains that 
long ago when humankind was young, it needed the guidance of Quetzalcoatls, keepers of the dead, until humans matured and no longer needed them. They went underground along with a few humans who joined them.

Afterwards, Asuna goes to her hideout to find another mysterious boy who looks like Shun standing on the ledge. Just then, a group of armed men called the Arch Angels appear, and attack both of them. The mysterious boy hides in the underground entrance with Asuna, and the two proceed further into the cave when the cave's entrance is bombed. The two meet a 
Quetzalcoatl who has apparently lost its physical senses and attacks the boy. He refuses to kill the gatekeeper, giving Asuna his clavis, a crystal, and fights back. The Arch Angels interfere, killing the gatekeeper. The Arch Angel commander captures Asuna and uses the clavis to open a gateway to Agartha. The commander and Asuna enter the gateway followed by the boy. Once inside the commander reveals himself to be Morisaki and the boy also reveals himself to be Shin, Shun's younger brother. Morisaki tells Shin that all he wants is to bring back his late wife from the dead. Shin leaves Asuna and Morisaki.

Morisaki tells Asuna that she can go back but she decides to accompany him. They both go into the realm via an underwater entrance. Once inside, they journey to the Gate of Life and Death which can bring the souls of people back from the dead, along with Mimi (who had sneaked in inside Asuna's backpack).

Her life changes when she encounters a bear-like creature, and is rescued by a bishonen named Shun, who uses the same type of crystal that Asuna uses. Shun reveals that neither he nor the bear-like creature are from the earth, but instead come from Agartha, an underground world where fertile fields bloom and where majestic monsters roam. They spend time together but only briefly, Shun then dies, making Asuna feel homesick for him. Not long before that a substitute teacher at her school, Ryuuji Morisaki, discusses the legends of Izanagi and Izanami in class which interests Asuna. She visited him later that day to learn more, at the end of which Ryuuji agreed to accompany Asuna on her journey to Agartha.
