Indonesia

Indonesia, known by the official name of the Republic of Indonesia or more fully the Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia, is an archipelago in Southeast Asia crossed by the equator and located between the continental landmasses of Asia and Oceania, thus known as a transcontinental country, as well as between the Pacific Ocean and the Indian Ocean.

Indonesia is the 14th largest country and the largest archipelago in the world with an area of 1,904,570 km², and the 6th most islanded country in the world, with 17,504 islands. An alternative name for the Indonesian archipelago is called the Nusantara. In addition, Indonesia is also the 4th most populous country in the world with a population of 277,749,853 in 2022, as well as the most Muslim country in the world, with more than 238,875,159 adherents or about 86.9%. Indonesia is a multiracial, multiethnic and multicultural country in the world, just like the United States.

As the world's third largest democracy, Indonesia is a presidential republic with a directly elected legislature. Indonesia has 38 provinces, of which nine have special status. The country's capital, Jakarta, is the second most populous urban area in the world. Indonesia shares land borders with Papua New Guinea, Timor Leste and the eastern part of Malaysia, and sea borders with Singapore, Vietnam, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, Palau and India. Despite its large population and dense territory, Indonesia has vast areas of wilderness that support one of the highest biodiversity in the world.

Indonesia is made up of various ethnic groups, languages and religions. Based on ethnic groups, Indonesia consists of the indigenous Austronesian and Melanesian peoples with the Austronesian peoples being the largest in number and predominantly inhabiting western Indonesia. The Javanese and Sundanese form the largest ethnic group with 57% of Indonesia's population. Indonesia's national motto, "Bhinneka Tunggal Ika" (Different but still one), means that socio-cultural diversity forms the unity of the country. In addition to having a dense population and vast territory, Indonesia has nature that supports the 2nd largest level of biodiversity in the world.

Indonesia is a member of the United Nations (UN), the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), the Asia-Africa Conference (KAA), the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), and the G20.

The word "Indonesia" comes from the ancient Greek Indus which refers to the Indus River in India and nesos which means "island". Thus, the word Indonesia means the "Indian archipelago", or the islands in the Indies; this refers to the similarities between the two peoples (India and Indonesia). In 1850, George Windsor Earl, a British ethnologist, originally proposed the terms Indunesia and Malayunesia for the inhabitants of the "Indian Islands or Malay Archipelago". Earl's student, James Richardson Logan, used the word Indonesia as a synonym for the Indian Islands. However, Dutch academic writing in the media of the Dutch East Indies did not use the word Indonesia, but the terms Malay Archipelago (Maleische Archipel); Dutch East Indies (Nederlandsch Oost Indië), or Indies (Indië); East (de Oost); and even Insulinde (this term was introduced in 1860 in the novel Max Havelaar (1859) written by Multatuli regarding criticism of Dutch colonialism).

From 1900, the name Indonesia became more common in academic circles outside the Netherlands, and Indonesian nationalists used it for political expression. 1884-1894, Adolf Bastian of the University of Berlin popularized the name through his book Indonesien oder die Inseln des Malayischen Archipels. The first Indonesian student to use it was Suwardi Suryaningrat (Ki Hadjar Dewantara), when he founded a news agency in the Netherlands called Indonesisch Pers Bureau in 1913.

Fossils of early humans such as Homo erectus, which anthropologists have also dubbed "Java Man", suggest that the Indonesian archipelago was inhabited between two million and 500,000 years ago. But the veracity of this is much disputed.

From 110,000 to 12,000 years ago, the western archipelago (roughly the western islands including present-day Sumatra, Java and Kalimantan) was still merging with mainland Asia, forming Sundaland. During this period, around 74,000,000 years ago, the eruption of Mount Toba, said to be one of the largest volcanic eruptions in history, caused climate change that is said to have almost wiped out the modern human population at that time. Humanity itself had not actually reached Sumatra yet, the migration wave from Africa was also temporarily halted due to this eruption. Mount Toba then sank and its caldera formed a large lake of the same name.

Around 60,000 years ago, the first wave of human migration that became the ancestors of the Melanesian race reached the archipelago. The end of the ice age at the beginning of the Holocene (12,000 years BCE) led to rising sea levels and the separation of the Sundaland lands from the mainland of Asia, then split to form the archipelago as it is today. These events triggered the human diaspora.

The arrival of Austronesian peoples from mainland Taiwan who began arriving in the archipelago around 3500 to 2000 BC caused the Melanesian peoples who had been there earlier to be pushed to areas far to the east of the archipelago, although some were assimilated / acculturated with these migrants. With fertile volcanic soil conditions, abundant biodiversity, coupled with the ability to cultivate crops owned by humans at that time, agricultural activities and settlements began to form and develop rapidly.

From the seventh century CE, the Srivijaya naval kingdom flourished due to trade and the influences of Hinduism and Buddhism. At that time, ancient Indonesian sailors had made long voyages to Madagascar and East Africa. Between the eighth and tenth centuries CE, the agricultural Buddhist Sailendra and Hindu Mataram dynasties thrived and declined in inland Java, leaving grand religious monuments such as Sailendra's Borobudur and Mataram's Prambanan. The Hindu Majapahit kingdom was founded in eastern Java in the late 13th century, and under Gajah Mada, its influence stretched over much of present-day Indonesia. This period is often referred to as a "Golden Age" in Indonesian history.

