Good Friday

Good Friday is the Friday before Easter Sunday, the anniversary of the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ and his death on Golgotha.
The day of death itself is not clearly recorded in the Bible. Some think it fell on a Wednesday, but more place it on a Friday. Based on the scriptural details of the Sanhedrin trial of Jesus, and scientific analysis, the crucifixion of Jesus very likely took place on a Friday, but the date is not known with certainty, and has recently been estimated to have taken place in 33 AD, by two groups of scholars, and was previously estimated to have taken place in 34 AD by Isaac Newton via calculations of the differences between the Jewish and Julian calendars and the magnitude of the crescent moon.

The date of Good Friday varies from year to year in the Gregorian and Julian calendars. Eastern and Western Christianity disagree on the dates of Easter and Good Friday. Good Friday is a widely recognized legal holiday around the world, including in most Western countries and 12 US states. Some predominantly Christian countries, such as Germany, have laws prohibiting certain actions such as dancing and horse racing, in memory of the somber nature of Good Friday.

'Good Friday' comes from the 'pious, holy' meaning of the word "good". Examples of less common expressions based on this obsolete meaning of "good" include "good book" for the Bible, "good tide" for "Christmas" or Shrovetide, and Good Wednesday for the Wednesday of Holy Week. Common etymologies incorrectly interpret "Good Friday" as a corruption of "Lord's Friday" which is similar to the linguistically correct description of "goodbye" as a contraction of "God be with you". In Old English, the day was called "Long Friday", and the equivalent of this term is still used in Scandinavian and Finnish languages.

The celebration of the Lord's Passion takes place in the afternoon, ideally at three o'clock; however, for pastoral reasons (especially in countries where Good Friday is not a public holiday), it is permissible to celebrate the liturgy earlier, even shortly after noon, or at a later hour. The celebration consists of three parts: the liturgy of the word, the worship of the cross, and holy communion. The altar is empty, with no crosses, candlesticks and altar cloths. It is also customary to empty the holy water font in preparation for the blessing of the water at the Easter Vigil. Traditionally, no bells are rung on Good Friday or Holy Saturday until the Easter Vigil.

After having previously held the Evening Supper (Matthew 26:17-25, Mark 14:12-25, Luke 22:7-23, John 13:21-30), Jesus went with His disciples to the Garden of Gethsemane. There Jesus prayed.
After Jesus had prayed, Judas came, "and a great multitude with swords and clubs, sent by the chief priests and elders of the people" Matthew 26:47. Jesus was then brought before the Jewish Council, in front of the High Priest Caiaphas.

The chief priests and even the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, that they might put him to death; but they could not find it, although many false witnesses appeared. But at last two men appeared, who said: "This man said: I can destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days." Then the high priest stood up and said to him: "Will you not answer the accusations of these witnesses against you?" But Jesus remained silent. Then the high priest said to Him: "As God lives, tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God, or not." Jesus answered: "You have said it. But I tell you, from now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Almighty and coming on the clouds of heaven." Then the high priest tore his clothes and said: "He blasphemed God. What do we need another witness for? Now you've heard him blaspheme. What do you think?" They answered and said: "He must be put to death!" Then they spat in his face and punched him; others struck him, saying: "Tell us, Messiah, who struck you?"

- Matthew 26:59-68

Meanwhile Peter, who had followed Jesus into the courtyard of the Sanhedrin, was recognized as a follower of Jesus but denied it three times, at which point the cock crowed. Peter remembered what Jesus had said to him: "Before the rooster crows, you have denied me three times." Then Peter went outside and wept bitterly. Matthew 26:75

Then Jesus was brought before the governor. And the governor asked Him: "Are you the king of the Jews?" Jesus answered: "You said so yourself." But to the charges that the chief priests and elders brought against Him, He gave no answer. Pilate said to Him: "Have you not heard how many things these witnesses have accused you of?" But He answered nothing, and the governor marveled greatly. The governor answered and said to them: "Which of these two do you want me to release to you?" They said: "Barabbas." Pilate said to them: "What then shall I do with Jesus, who is called Christ?" They all cried out: "He must be crucified!" He said: "But what evil has he done?" But they shouted even louder: "He must be crucified!" When Pilate saw that all efforts would be in vain, and that a disturbance had begun, he took water and washed his hands before the crowd and said: "I am not guilty of this man's blood; that is your business." And all the people answered: "Let his blood be on us and on our children!" Then he released Barabbas for them, but he scourged Jesus and handed him over to be crucified.

- Matthew 27:11-14, 23-26
Jesus was tortured and mocked
Main article: Death of Jesus
After Jesus was sentenced to the cross by Pontius Pilate, Jesus was first tortured as was common practice in Roman times.

Then the soldiers of the governor brought Jesus to the courthouse, and called the whole army to gather around Jesus. They stripped him of his clothes and put a purple robe on him. They wove a crown of thorns and put it on His head, and gave Him a reed in His right hand. Then they knelt before Him and mocked Him, saying: "Hail, King of the Jews!" They spat on Him and took the reed and struck Him on the head. And when they had mocked him, they took off the robe from him, and put his clothes on him. Then they led Him out to be crucified.

- Matthew 27:27-31
Jesus crucified
Main article: Death of Jesus
After being scourged, Jesus was put to death on a cross on Golgotha Hill or Calvary.

When they had crucified him, they divided his clothes by lot. Then they sat there guarding Him. And over His head was an inscription stating the reason for His condemnation: "This is Jesus, the King of the Jews." Two robbers were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left. Passers-by blasphemed Him and, shaking their heads, said: "You who want to destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, save yourself if you are the Son of God, come down from the cross!" And the chief priests and the scribes and the elders mocked Him, saying: "He saved others, but He could not save Himself! Is He the King of Israel? Let him come down from the cross and we will believe in him. He put his hope in God: let God save him, if it pleases him. For He has said: I am the Son of God." Even the thieves who were crucified with Him reproached Him in this way.

- Matthew 27:35-44
Jesus died
Main article: Death of Jesus
Jesus died on the cross, not because He suffocated or bled out, but He Himself gave His life into the hands of His Father.

Jesus also cried out with a loud voice and gave up His life. And behold, the veil of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom, and there was an earthquake, and the rocks were split, and the tombs were opened, and many of the saints who had died rose. After the resurrection of Jesus, they came out of the tombs and entered the holy city and appeared to many people. The centurion and his soldiers who were guarding Jesus were terrified when they saw the earthquake and what had happened, and said: "Truly this is the Son of God."

- Matthew 27:50-54
Date calculation
Good Friday is the Friday before Easter, the date of which differs between the Eastern and Western Churches (see Computus for a more detailed explanation). Easter falls on the first Sunday after the Easter Full Moon, the full moon on or after March 21, which is the date of the vernal equinox. Western calculations use the Gregorian Calendar, while Eastern calculations use the Julian Calendar, where March 21 now coincides with April 3 according to the Gregorian calendar. The calculations to determine the date of the full moon are also different. See Methods of Determining the Date of Easter (Astronomical Society of South Australia).

Since Easter in the Western Church can fall on any of the dates from March 22 to April 25 according to the Gregorian calendar, Good Friday can fall between March 20 and April 23. In the Eastern Church, Easter can fall between March 22 and April 25 according to the Julian calendar (between April 4 and May 8 according to the Gregorian calendar, for the period 1900 and 2099), so Good Friday can fall between March 19 and April 22 (or between April 1 and May 5 according to the Gregorian calendar).
