Maundy Thursday

Maundy Thursday is the Thursday before Easter, on this Holy Week holiday Christians have a tradition of commemorating the Last Supper led by Jesus. This day is one of the most important days in the Church calendar. It is the first day of the Easter feast, which begins at 6pm, and lasts 7 days. This Maundy Thursday is also called Holy Thursday.(English: Holy Thursday)

The Ritual of Evening Communion after this at every mass or service is commemorated as the celebration of the Eucharist or Holy Communion. At this evening mass, the priest also washes the feet of the congregation in commemoration of Jesus washing the feet of his disciples at the last supper, Jesus' earthly ministry before his death.

The use of the names "Maundy Thursday", "Holy Thursday" and others vary in different places. It is the local geographical culture and conventions that influence these 'names'.

"Maundy Thursday" is common in England, but less so in Irish and Scottish contexts. Usually people also calculate it based on local calendar techniques. The Anglican Church uses the name "Maundy Thursday" in its Book of Order, and considers "Holy Thursday" an alternative name for the Ascension of Jesus. But outside of the official order of worship, Anglicans sometimes use the name "Holy Thursday" to designate the day before Good Friday.

The United Methodist Church uses the name "Holy Thursday!" in its worship services (according to the "United Methodist Book of Worship"), but in official sources, it uses both "Maundy Thursday" and "Holy Thursday". Both names are used by Christian denominations alike, including the Lutheran Church or portions of the Reformed Church. The Presbyterian Church uses the designation "Maundy Thursday" to denote a holy day in its official sources. In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the name for the holy day is, in the Byzantine Rite, "Great and Holy Thursday" or "Holy Thursday", and in Western Rite churches "Maundy Thursday", "Holy Thursday" or both. The Coptic Orthodox Church uses the names "Maundy Thursday" and "Covenant Thursday" for this holy day. In the Maronite Church and the Syrian Orthodox Church, "Thursday of Mysteries" or "Thursday of Mysteries". "Maundy Thursday" is the official name in the laws of the United Kingdom and the Philippines.

Orthodox icon of Christ washing the apostles' feet (16th century, Pskov School of iconography). The Maundy Thursday service traditionally and historically reminds us of the events leading up to Jesus' death. Events that are very rich in meaning and importance. It is a remembrance of the woman who anointed Jesus with perfume from a jar and wiped him with her hair. It is also a remembrance of Jesus' evening meal, where for the last time Jesus shared the Passover bread with the disciples. It is a sign of the exemplary Jesus whom all his followers called "the servant". It is also a remembrance of the betrayal of Peter and Judas.

Maundy Thursday service is a prayer service, depicting the role of Jesus who came into the world bringing light, light that was soon extinguished. The service has a gift as its outline as a circle; light (light)-service-Holy Communion-service-light. The light of God is the light of creation and the light of Christ. In the light of Christ we find a message, "Serve"!

But what is special here is that this foot washing was done by Jesus, the Master, to his disciples. Jesus performed a ritual that was commonly done in a way that was not different. Jesus did a job that should not have been done by a Master. This gesture of foot washing symbolizes an example of humbling oneself and serving. Jesus did work that a Master should not have done to his disciple. This gesture of washing feet symbolizes an example of humbling oneself and serving.

The act of Jesus washing the feet is a symbolic act that symbolizes surrender, cleansing, forgiveness, renewal, discipleship and worship. The surrender intended is Jesus' surrender in death to "atone for sin"/"cleanse" others. The washing of Jesus' feet also symbolizes humility and the desire to be a "servant" who is willing to serve even the least of these.

In Roman Catholicism, the Maundy Thursday service is divided into four major parts, namely: Word Service, Foot Washing Ceremony, Eucharistic Liturgy, and the Procession of the Transfer of the Blessed Sacrament. In general, the order of the mass takes place like the Eucharistic Celebration on a regular Saturday / Sunday, but in this celebration there is a foot washing ceremony and the ceremony of the Procession of the Transfer of the Blessed Sacrament. In addition, in this celebration, a wooden bell is used instead of a gong/bell in the Great Thanksgiving Prayer, and there was no closing song.
