Komodo

Komodo dragons, or Komodo monitor lizards in full (Varanus komodoensis), are a species of large monitor lizard found on Komodo, Rinca, Flores, Gili Motang, and Gili Dasami islands in East Nusa Tenggara province, Indonesia. This animal is also referred to by the natives of Komodo Island by the local name ora. Another name for Komodo dragons is land crocodiles, although Komodo dragons are not a species of crocodile.

Komodo dragons are the largest species of the Varanidae family, and the largest lizard in the world, averaging 2-3 meters in length and weighing up to 100 kg. The Komodo dragon is the apex predator in its habitat as there are no known large carnivores other than this lizard anywhere in its geographical range.

Their massive bodies and terrifying reputation make them one of the most famous animals in the world. Today, the Komodo dragon's actual habitat has shrunk due to human activity, leading the IUCN to list the Komodo dragon as a species vulnerable to extinction. Komodo lizards have been designated as protected animals by the Indonesian government and their habitat has been turned into a national park, the Komodo National Park, which was established to protect them.

Mating begins between May and August, and the eggs are laid in September; as many as 20 eggs are laid at a time in abandoned megapode nests or in self-dug nest holes. The eggs are incubated for seven to eight months, hatching in April, when insects are most abundant. Young dragons are very vulnerable and stay in trees to avoid predators, such as cannibalizing adults. They take 8 to 9 years to mature and are estimated to live up to 30 years.

Wild Komodo dragons can only be found in Indonesia in East Nusa Tenggara, specifically on the islands of Komodo, Rinca and several small surrounding islands and on the west coast of the island of Flores. The Komodo dragon's habitat is open grassland (savanna) and scrub forest, sometimes also on the coast. Komodo dragons are active during the day and evening, but take shelter when the temperature is very hot.

Komodo dragons are solitary animals and only come together when feeding or breeding. They can run up to 20 km/h over short distances. are good swimmers and can dive as deep as 4.5 meters and climb trees using their strong claws. To catch prey that is out of reach, Komodo dragons can stand on their hind legs and use their tail for support. As they grow older and bigger, Komodo dragons often use their claws as weapons, as their large body size makes it difficult for them to climb trees.

For shelter, Komodo dragons are able to dig holes 1-3 meters wide with their strong forelimbs and claws. Due to their size and habit of sleeping in holes, Komodo dragons are able to maintain their body heat during the night and spend less time basking the next morning.

Komodo dragons are carnivorous. However, they are more likely to eat carrion. Existing research shows that Komodo lizards hunt live prey by sneaking up on their victims followed by a sudden attack. When the prey is within reach, the Komodo dragon immediately attacks it by biting on the underside of the body or throat. Komodo dragons find their prey by using their tongues, which can sense the smell of prey, dead or dying animals at a distance of up to 9.5 kilometers.

Komodo dragons do not deliberately allow the prey to escape with fatal injuries but try to kill prey outright using a combination of lacerating damage and blood loss. They have been recorded as killing wild pigs within seconds, and observations of Komodo dragons tracking prey for long distances are likely misinterpreted cases of prey escaping an attack before succumbing to infection. Most prey attacked by a Komodo dragon reputedly suffer from said sepsis and will later be eaten by the same or other lizards.
