Kotonoha no Niwa

Kotonoha no Niwa (言の葉の庭) also known as The Garden of Words is a 2013 comedy/drama animated film written, directed, and edited by Makoto Shinkai. The animation was done by CoMix Wave Films and distributed by Toho. The movie stars Miyu Irino and Kana Hanazawa. The music was done by Daisuke Kashiwa, instead of Tenmon, who did the music in Shinkai's previous films. The theme song, titled "Rain", was originally written and sung by Senri Oe in 1988, but was re-sung by Motohiro Hata for this movie. It was later made into a manga, with illustrations by Midori Motohashi, and novellated by Shinkai the same year the movie was released.

Kotonoha no Niwa is considered a romantic and drama movie. The movie opens with the beginning of the rainy season in Tokyo with Takao Akizuki (秋月 孝雄, Akizuki Takao), a 15-year-old high school student who dreams of becoming a shoemaker. He skips his first class and sketches shoes in a park-in Shinjuku Gyoen. He then meets Yukari Yukino (野 百香里, Yukino Yukari), a 27-year-old woman who skipped work and was enjoying beer and chocolate in the park. When Yukari sees the school crest on Takao's uniform, she bids him farewell with a tanka (a form of Japanese poetry), leaving Takao in confusion. The two continued to see each other and chat in the park on rainy mornings, but never formally introduced themselves. After Yukari expressed interest in Takao's shoe-making skills, Takao decided to make her a pair of shoes in the appropriate size. With the end of the rainy season, Takao stops visiting the park and focuses on his work. With the end of the rainy season, Takao also stops visiting the park and focuses on his work.

After summer vacation, Takao returns to school and accidentally sees Yukari. Her friends tell her that she is a literature teacher and has been the target of gossip and bullying. Out of kindness and to avoid further confrontation, Yukari chooses to shy away from her job, and secludes herself in the garden, hoping to learn to overcome her fears and be able to "walk" again. However, eventually Yukari quits her job and leaves school. That afternoon, Takao meets Yukari in the park and welcomes her by reciting the 2,514th poem of the Japanese poetry collection Man'yōshū, the correct answer to her tanka, which he found in a classic Japanese literature textbook. After getting soaked by the storm, the two go to Yukari's apartment and spend the afternoon together. When Takao confesses his love after dinner, Yukari is visibly moved, but then reminds him that she is a teacher and tells him that she will return to her hometown in Shikoku. Hearing that, Takao then excuses himself to go home. Yukari realizes his mistake and chases after him, finding Takao on the stairs. Still upset, an angry Takao retracts what he had said and criticizes her for being so secretive and never opening up to him. Yukari hugs him and they both cry, Yukari explaining that their time together in the park had saved her.

The credit show shows that Takao barely passed his final exam, but still worked towards his goal, while Yukari returned to Shikoku and continued her teaching career. In the post-credit scene, Takao revisits the garden in winter, reads a letter from Yukari, places his shoe work-for Yukari-on a bench and promises to find her after he makes progress in his career.
