Palm Sunday

Palm Sunday, officially called Palm Sunday in Honor of the Passion of the Lord, is a day of commemoration in the liturgy of the Christian Church, especially the Roman Catholic Church, which always falls on the Sunday before Easter. This celebration refers to the events recorded in the four Gospels, namely Mark 11:1-11, Matthew 21:1-11, Luke 19:28-44 and John 12:12-19. The celebration commemorates the entry of Jesus into the city of Jerusalem and was hailed by the crowds. The entry of Jesus Christ into the holy city of Jerusalem is special because this happened before Jesus was tortured, died, and rose from the dead. That is why Palm Sunday is called the opening of Holy Week, which focuses on Jesus' last week in the city of Jerusalem. In the Palm Sunday liturgy, the congregation is generally presented with palm fronds and the church hall is filled with palm ornaments, mimicking the crowds who hailed Jesus with palm fronds.

In most Christian rituals, Palm Sunday is celebrated with the blessing and distribution of palm branches (or other native tree branches), which symbolize the palm branches that the crowds scattered before Christ as he ascended to Jerusalem. These palm branches are sometimes woven into crosses. The difficulty of obtaining palm trees in unfavorable climates led to the replacement of native tree branches, including box, olive, willow, and yew trees.

The palm leaf is a symbol of victory. This palm leaf brings meaning towards Christian symbols. The palm leaf is used to express the martyr's victory over death. Martyrs are often depicted with palm fronds between places or in addition to instruments of martyrdom. Christ often showed the connection of the palm leaf as a symbol of victory over sin and death. More obviously, it is associated with His triumphant entry into Jerusalem, (John 12:12-13).

Palm leaves have a green color, green being the color of vegetation and spring. Hence the symbol of the victory of spring over winter or life over death, being a mixture of yellow and blue it also symbolizes charity and the registration of good works of the soul.

Whatever the type, these branches are blessed and distributed along with candles either during the All-Night Vigil on Feast Night (Saturday night), or before the Divine Liturgy on Sunday morning. The Great Entrance of the Divine Liturgy commemorates the "Entry of the Lord into Jerusalem", so the meaningfulness of this moment is interspersed with Palm Sunday when everyone stands, holding a branch and lighting a candle. The faithful take these branches and candles home after the liturgy, and keep them in a corner of their icon as an evloghia (blessing).

During Palm Sunday, people wave palm fronds while singing. This expresses the people's participation with Jesus in the procession to Jerusalem. It expresses the goal to be reached in the future: the city of God, where there is peace.

On Palm Sunday, the church not only commemorates the entry of Jesus into the city of Jerusalem but also remembers the agony of Jesus. Hence, Palm Sunday is also referred to as Passion Sunday. In the tradition of church worship, after the congregation performs the palm leaf procession (waving palm leaves), the congregation will listen to the reading of the stories of Jesus' passion taken from the Gospels. Indeed, these stories will be re-read in the Good Friday liturgy but the meaning is different. The reading of the story of Jesus' passion in the Palm Sunday liturgy is intended to make people understand that the glory of Jesus lies not only in His triumphant entry into Jerusalem but in His death on the cross.
