Nato

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), also called the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, is a multi-country military alliance organization consisting of 2 North American countries, 27 European countries, and 1 Eurasian country for mutual security that was established in 1949, in support of the North Atlantic Treaty signed in Washington, DC on April 4, 1949. NATO originally aimed to suppress the communist ideological influence of the Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact alliance during the Cold War era. The motto of NATO is "Animus in consulendo liber" which means "An unfettered mind in deliberation".

NATO's main headquarters is located in Brussels, Belgium, while its military headquarters is near Mons, Belgium. The alliance has targeted the deployment of NATO Response Forces in Eastern Europe, and the combined military of all NATO members includes about 3.5 million soldiers and personnel. Their combined military expenditure in 2020 amounted to more than 57 percent of the global nominal total. In addition, members have agreed to achieve or maintain a defense spending target of at least two percent of their GDP by 2024.

NATO was formed with twelve founding members and has added new members eight times, most recently when North Macedonia joined the alliance in March 2020. Following the acceptance of their applications for membership in June 2022, Finland and Sweden are anticipated to become the 31st and 32nd members, with their Protocols of Accession to the North Atlantic Treaty now in the process of being ratified by existing members. In addition, NATO currently recognizes Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, and Ukraine as prospective members. Enlargement has caused tensions with non-member Russia, one of the twenty additional countries participating in NATO's Partnership for Peace program. Nineteen other countries are involved in institutionalized dialogue programs with NATO.

NATO has thirty members, mainly in Europe and North America. Some of these countries also have territories on several continents, which can only be covered as far south as the Tropic of Cancer in the Atlantic Ocean, which defines NATO's "area of responsibility" under Article 6 of the North Atlantic Treaty. During the original treaty negotiations, the United States insisted that colonies such as the Belgian Congo be excluded from the treaty. French Algeria, however, was protected until its independence on July 3, 1962. Twelve of these thirty are original members who joined in 1949, while the other eighteen joined in one of the eight enlargement rounds. Some members spend more than two percent of their gross domestic product on defense, with the United States accounting for three-quarters of NATO's defense spending.
