World War II

From 1939 to 1945, World War II or the Second World War (commonly abbreviated to WWII or WW2) was a global war that took place. The war involved many countries in the world - including all the major powers - which eventually formed two conflicting military alliances: Allies and Axis. It was the largest war in history, involving more than 100 million people in various military forces. In a state of "total war", the major powers maximized all their economic, industrial and scientific capabilities for war purposes, erasing the distinction between civilian and military resources. Characterized by a number of key events involving mass civilian deaths, including the Holocaust and the use of nuclear weapons in warfare, the war cost 50 million to 70 million lives. This death toll made World War II the deadliest conflict in human history.

The causes of World War II are still debated, but contributing factors include the Second Italian-Ethiopian War, the Spanish Civil War, the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Soviet-Japanese border conflict, the rise of fascism in Europe, and European tensions after World War I. World War II is generally considered to have begun on September 1, 1939, when Nazi Germany, under Adolf Hitler, invaded Poland. Britain and France then declared war on Germany on 3 September. Under the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union had divided Poland and marked out their "spheres of influence" in Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Romania.

Imperial Japan sought to dominate East Asia and had already started a war with the Republic of China in 1937, but the general world war broke out on September 1, 1939 with the invasion of Poland by Germany followed by a series of declarations of war against Germany by France and Britain. From late 1939 to early 1941, in a series of campaigns and treaties, Germany formed an Axis alliance with Italy, controlling or conquering most of continental Europe. After the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, Germany and the Soviet Union split and annexed territories of their own European neighbors, including Poland. Great Britain, with its empire and Commonwealth, became the only major Allied power to continue fighting against the Axis bloc, with battles in North Africa and the Battle of the Atlantic. 

In June 1941, the European Axis launched an invasion of the Soviet Union that signaled the opening of the largest land war theater in history, involving most of the Axis military forces until the end of the war. In December 1941, Japan joined the Axis bloc, attacked the United States and European territories in the Pacific Ocean, and quickly took control of much of the Western Pacific.

The Axis offensive stopped in 1942, after Japan lost various naval battles and the European Axis armies were defeated in North Africa and Stalingrad. In 1943, through a series of German defeats in Eastern Europe, the Allied invasion of Italy, and United States victories in the Pacific, the Axis lost their initiative and retreated strategically on all fronts. In 1944, the Western Allies invaded France, while the Soviet Union recaptured all once-annexed territories and invaded Germany and its allies. The war in Europe ended with the occupation of Berlin by Soviet and Polish troops and Germany's unconditional surrender on May 8, 1945. Throughout 1944 and 1945, the United States defeated the Japanese Navy and occupied several islands in the Western Pacific, dropping atomic bombs on the country ahead of the invasion of the Japanese Islands. The Soviet Union then followed through negotiations by declaring war on Japan and invading Manchuria. The Empire of Japan surrendered on August 15, 1945, thus ending the war in Asia and cementing the Allies' total victory over the Axis.

World War II changed the political course and social structure of the world. The United Nations (UN) was established to strengthen international cooperation and prevent future conflicts. The great powers that won the war-the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Great Britain, and France-became permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. The Soviet Union and the United States emerged as competing superpowers and set the stage for a World War that would last for the next 46 years. Meanwhile, the influence of the major European powers began to wane, and the decolonization of Asia and Africa began. Most countries whose industries had been badly affected began to undergo economic recovery. Political integration, particularly in Europe, emerged as an attempt to stabilize post-war relations.
