Fasting and abstinence in the Catholic Church

The Roman Catholic Church encourages its faithful to practice fasting and abstinence at certain times. For Catholics, fasting means reducing food intake, while abstinence means refraining from consuming or using something that is good for oneself and does not lead to sin, such as eating meat. The Catholic Church teaches that fasting and abstinence are a sign of repentance for sin as well as an example of Jesus' fasting and remembrance of Jesus' suffering, and therefore should also be followed by prayer, charity, and good deeds.

Fasting according to the Catholic Church does not mean stopping food intake altogether, but means reducing the amount of food intake consumed by a person on a particular day. Furthermore, Catholic fasting in various countries, including in Indonesia, means that one may only eat a full meal once in a full day, but is allowed to eat small portions at other times. For those who are used to eating three meals a day, a full meal can be taken at breakfast, lunch, or dinner, although a full meal is more recommended at lunchtime.

In many countries and in Indonesia, fasting is obligatory on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday, and must be practiced by people who have reached the age of majority, that is people who have reached the age of 18, up to those who have reached the age of 60 according to the Indonesian Bishops' Conference (KWI). Individuals may add their own days of fasting or fast beyond the mandatory age.

The term abstinence in the Catholic Church is different from fasting. Abstinence means stopping and refraining from consuming food and drink or using something that is good for oneself and not sinful, which is practiced on certain days. In many countries, including Indonesia, Catholics mainly abstain from eating red meat on days of abstinence, but this can be replaced or supplemented by fish, salt, sugar, cigarettes, entertainment, etc.

According to the Apostolic Constitution of Paenitemini and the Code of Canon Law, abstinence is observed every Friday throughout the year, except those days that are feast days other than Good Friday, and Ash Wednesday. However, most bishops' conferences in the world require abstinence to be observed on Ash Wednesday, Fridays in Lent, and Good Friday. people at the age of 14 are required to observe abstinence. Individuals may add their own days of abstinence or observe abstinence beyond the mandatory age, as long as the food or activity abstained from does not cause sin if not observed.

The contemporary canonical rules on fasting and abstinence for Catholics in the Sui iuris Latin Church (which comprises the vast majority of the world's Catholics) culminate in the Apostolic Constitution Paenitemini issued by Pope Paul VI in 1966, which was codified in the 1983 Code of Canon Law as follows:

Year 1249 : All the Christian faithful are obliged in their own way to do penance according to the divine law; but in order that they may all unite in a common exercise of penance, days of penance are appointed, on which the Christian faithful in particular spend time in prayer, perform works of piety and charity, deny themselves by the more faithful performance of their obligations and especially by fasting and abstinence, according to the norm of the following canons.
Year 1250 : The day and time of penance in the whole Church is every Friday throughout the year, and also in Lent.
Year 1251 : Abstinence from meat or other food according to the provisions of the Conference of Bishops is to be observed every Friday throughout the year, unless that Friday happens to fall on one of the feast days; whereas abstinence and fasting are to be observed on Ash Wednesday and on Good Friday, commemorating the Passion and Death of Our Lord Jesus Christ.

Fast Days are observed on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday. Days of Abstinence are observed on Ash Wednesday and seven Fridays during Lent until Good Friday.
Obliged to fast are all Catholics who are 18 years old until the beginning of their 60th year. Those who are obliged to abstain are all Catholics who are 14 years old and above.
Fasting (in the juridical sense) means eating a full meal only once a day. Abstinence (in the juridical sense) means choosing to abstain from meat, or fish or salt, or snacks or cigarettes. If desired, you can still add your own fasts and abstinence privately, without being burdened with sin if you break them.
