Russia

Russia, officially known as the Russian Federation, is a semi-presidential federation in the form of a constitutional republic in eastern Europe and northern Asia from northwest to southeast. The country shares land borders with Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland (both bordering Kaliningrad Oblast), Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, China, Mongolia and North Korea. It also shares sea borders with Japan on the Sea of Okhotsk and the US state of Alaska on the Bering Strait.
With an area of 17,125,191 km², Russia is the largest country in the world. Covering one-eighth of the earth's land area, it has the ninth-largest population in the world with approximately 147,190,000 people (2021). Stretching across North Asia and parts of eastern Europe, Russia has 11 time zones and its territory is made up of different types of environments and soils.

The country's history dates back to the Eastern Slavs who existed in Europe between the 3rd and 8th centuries. Founded and led by the elite Varangians and their descendants, the medieval state of Kiev Rus emerged around the 9th century. In 988 they adopted Orthodox Christianity from the Byzantine Empire, giving rise to the Byzantine and Slavic (Gopnik) cultures that define Russian culture to this day.Kiev Rus' eventually fragmented into smaller states, parts of their lands were later captured by the Mongols and became a Golden Horde colony in the 13th century. The Moscow principality gradually reunited and became independent from the Golden Horde, and was able to regain dominance over the cultural and political heritage of Kiev Rus'. In the 18th century, the country expanded tremendously through conquest, annexation and exploration into the Russian Empire which was the third largest empire in history, extending from Poland in Europe to Alaska in North America which was once Russian territory.

After the Russian Revolution, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic became the main and largest part of the Socialist Republic of the Soviet Union, the first country in the world to have a socialist state constitution. The Soviet Union played a defensive role in the Allied victory in World War II, and later emerged as a superpower and opponent of the United States during the Cold War. The Soviet Era saw some of the most significant technological achievements of the 20th century, including the world's first man-made satellite and the first human launch into space. By the end of 1990, the Soviet Union had the world's second-largest economy, the world's largest military force and the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, 15 independent republics split off. As the largest, most populous and economically most developed country, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic changed its name to the Russian Federation and continued the legal status and successor state of the Soviet Union.

Russia's economy ranked 12th largest by nominal GDP and sixth largest by balanced expenditure in 2015. Russia's energy and mineral resources are the largest in the world, making it the world's top oil producer and natural gas producer. The country is one of five recognized nuclear weapon states and has the world's largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction. Russia is a major country and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, as well as a member of the G20, Council of Europe, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), World Trade Organization (WTO), a major member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and one of the five members of the Eurasian Economic Union, along with Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.
