Soeharto

General (ret.) H. M. Soeharto, was the second President of Indonesia who served from 1967 to 1998, succeeding Soekarno. Internationally, especially in the West, Soeharto is often referred to by the popular title "The Smiling General" (Indonesian: "The Smiling General") because of his smiling face and friendly demeanor. However, with his controversies, he was also often referred to as an authoritarian to those who disagreed with him.

Suharto was born in the small village of Kemusuk, in the Godean area near Yogyakarta, during the Dutch colonial era. He grew up in modest circumstances. His Javanese Muslim parents divorced shortly after his birth, and he lived with foster parents throughout his childhood. During the Japanese occupation era, Soeharto served in the Indonesian security forces organized by the Japanese. During the Indonesian independence struggle, he joined the newly formed Indonesian Army. There, Suharto rose to the rank of major general some time after Indonesian independence was achieved.

Before becoming president, Soeharto was a military leader during the Dutch East Indies and Japanese Empire, with the last rank of Major General. After the September 30th Movement in 1965, Soeharto carried out security operations on orders from President Soekarno, one of which was to crack down on the September 30th Movement and declare the PKI a banned organization. Various controversies say this operation killed around 100,000 to 2 million people, but this number is questionable because there were also many victims of the September 30 Movement.

Soeharto was then mandated by the Provisional People's Consultative Assembly (MPRS) as President on March 26, 1968 to replace Soekarno, and officially became president in 1968. He was re-elected by the MPR in 1973, 1978, 1983, 1988, 1993 and 1998. In 1998, his term ended after resigning on May 21 of that year, following the May 1998 riots and the occupation of the DPR/MPR building by thousands of students. He was the longest serving president of Indonesia. Soeharto was succeeded by B.J. Habibie.

Under the "New Order" government, Suharto built a strong, centralized and military-dominated government. What began as an oligarchic military dictatorship evolved into a personalistic, Suharto-centered authoritarian regime. His ability to maintain stability in Indonesia's vast and diverse territory and his overt anti-communist stance earned him economic and diplomatic support from the West during the Cold War. 

Suharto was also a controversial figure for restricting the freedom of Indonesian citizens of Chinese descent, occupying East Timor, imposing the single principle of Pancasila in many areas, and being called one of the most corrupt regimes in modern world history. According to Transparency International, the estimated loss to the state was around USD 15-35 billion during his reign. However, this was never proven, with Time Magazine losing a lawsuit and another attempt to prosecute Soeharto failing due to his deteriorating health. After a prolonged illness, he died of multifunctional organ failure in Jakarta on January 27, 2008.
