Suzume

Suzume (Japanese: すずめの戸締まり Hepburn: Suzume no Tojimari, "Suzume Door Locking") is a 2022 Japanese animated fantasy adventure film produced by CoMix Wave Films and released by Toho. The movie depicts a high school girl and a mysterious young man who try to prevent a series of disasters from happening across Japan. The movie began work in 2020, written and directed by Makoto Shinkai.

Nanoka Hara and Hokuto Matsumura are the voice actors in this movie. Character design was done by Masayoshi Tanaka, animation direction by Kenichi Tsuchiya, art direction by Takumi Tanji, and music direction by Radwimps and Kazuma Jinnouchi.

Suzume Iwato is a 17-year-old high school girl who lives with her aunt in a small town in Miyazaki. One day she sees a dream from when she was a child and looks for her mother. After a while, she woke up. Suzume then goes to school. On the way, she met a young man who was looking for an abandoned area there. He told her about an old onsen resort. Out of curiosity, she followed him to the resort, finding a door that stood still. She opened the door and saw a different world inside. She tried to enter, but failed. Then she tripped over a statue which then turned into a cat. Frightened, she left.

Later at school, while eating with her friends, a small earthquake occurred. Seeing a red column near the resort, Suzume felt suspicious, and rushed to the resort, finding the man she had met before. He tried to close the door, unfortunately he was injured, but then he again rushed to close the door. Seeing him struggling, Suzume tried to help him. She closed the door with her key, and the red column disappeared. Then, the man introduced himself as Sōta Munakata. He explains that he must find and lock doors in abandoned places to prevent "worms" from causing earthquakes. A cat appears and turns Sota into a child's chair that he sits on. Enraged, Sōta who had been transformed into a chair then chased the cat onto the ferry to Ehime. The cat was once a keystone, and the worm was released after it was removed.

In Ehime, the couple used clues from locals who named the cat "Daijin", to follow it. An earthquake occurred and they tried to close the doors at an abandoned school. Sōta loses his key so he tells Suzume to imagine the school's glory days. They lock the doors and chase the worms away.

At the next destination, a new worm appears in an abandoned amusement park. Sōta demands Daijin to return to being a keystone, but he refuses, wanting to "play" with Suzume. Suzume and Sota lock the door. As they slept, it was seen that Sōta lost his sense of self in the form of his chair.

Suzume and Sōta go to Sōta's apartment in Tokyo. He tells her the myth of Namazu and that the main keystone is missing; if the Tokyo worm appears, Japan will be destroyed. Her family makes sure the door stays locked, and she bears the burden of her hospitalized grandfather. Daijin says Sota must become the new keystone to stop the worm. After finding the worm, Sota turns into a keystone in Suzume's hands. Since the earthquake will kill many people, Suzume tearfully seals the worm with the keystone. She wakes up in a cave, where she finds Tokyo's door. In the dream world, she sees Sota's keystone. Sōta's grandfather says she must find the first door she entered to return to the dream world and save Sōta.

Suzume begins her journey back to her hometown of Tōhoku, which was destroyed in the 2011 Tōhoku tsunami. She is joined by her aunt Tamaki, Daijin, and Tomoyo Serizawa, Sōta's friend. After an argument, Suzume realizes Tamaki is possessed by Sadaijin, the black cat. Tamaki becomes uncontrollable and Suzume makes peace with him before entering the doorway.

The world was filled with worms and Sota was still. Suzumi pulled him out and he returned to his human form. However, Daijin returned to being a keystone as a result. To stop the worms, Sōta prayed, and restored Suzume's hometown memories. Sadaijin then also turned to stone. Suzume and Sōta sealed the worm and brought peace to the dream world. Sōta then noticed a child: Suzume from 12 years ago. Suzume remembered the first time she entered the dream world. Her younger self had confused her older self for her mother. She gave the chair to young Suzume and told her about her future. Suzume and Sōta then left the dream world and Sōta returned to Tokyo while Suzume returned to Kyushu. Later, Suzume was on her way to school when she saw Sōta walking on the street they first met.
