Wayang

Wayang (from Javanese: ꦮꦪꦁ, wayang, 'shadow') is a traditional performing art native to Indonesia that originated and flourished on the islands of Java and Bali. UNESCO, the United Nations cultural organization, on November 7, 2003 designated wayang as Indonesia's most famous shadow puppet show, a World Heritage of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.

Until recently, the earliest records that could be obtained about wayang performances came from the Balitung Inscription in the 10th Century. In 903 AD, an inscription called the Balitung (Mantyasih) Inscription was created by King Balitung of the Sanjaya Dynasty, from the Ancient Medang Kingdom. They state Si Galigi Mawayang Buat Hyang Macarita Bimma Ya Kumara, which means 'Galigi held a puppet show for the gods by taking the story of Bima Kumara'. It seems that certain features of traditional puppet theater have survived since then. Galigi was a traveling artist who was asked to perform for a special royal occasion. At the event he performed the story of the hero Bima from the Mahabharata.

Mpu Kanwa, the court poet of Airlangga of the Kahuripan Kingdom, wrote in 1035 CE in his kakawin Arjunawiwaha: santoṣâhĕlĕtan kĕlir sira sakêng sang hyang Jagatkāraṇa, which means, "He is steadfast and only the wayang screen is far from the 'Mover of the World'." Kelir is the Javanese word for wayang screen, a poem that eloquently compares real life to a wayang performance where the almighty Jagatkāraṇa (world mover) as the supreme puppeteer (wayang master) is only a thin screen of a human being. This mention of wayang as wayang kulit suggests that wayang performances were already known at the court of Airlangga and that the wayang tradition was well established in Java, perhaps earlier. An inscription from this period also mentions several occupations as awayang and aringgit.

When Hinduism entered Indonesia and adapted the existing culture, this performing art became an effective medium to spread Hinduism. Wayang performances use the Ramayana and Mahabharata stories.

The Wali Songo in Java already divided wayang into three. Wayang Kulit in the east, wayang wong in Central Java and wayang golek in West Java. It was Raden Patah and Sunan Kali Jaga who made a big contribution. Look for puppets in West Java, golek ono in Javanese, until you find the wong in the middle, don't just find the skin in the East in wetan wiwitan. Looking for identity is in the West or Kulon or kula which is in the chest of the human heart. The intentions of the Guardians are too lofty and high in philosophy. Wayang is genuine Javanese, pakeliran means a pair between the shadow and the original item. Like the two creeds. As for God masyrik wal maghrib, it must be translated into Javanese first, which means wetan kawitan and kulon or kula or me inside. Look for the god who is the first kawitan and who is in the human heart. (sik)

Likewise, during the advent of Islam, when performances featuring "God" or "Gods" in human form were banned, puppets made of cowhide appeared, where only the shadow was seen during the performance. These puppets are now known as shadow puppets. To spread Islam, Sadat puppets were also developed to introduce Islamic values.

The development of wayang from the 19th century to the 20th century cannot be separated from the puppeteers who continue to develop this traditional art. One of them is the late Ki H. Asep Sunandar Sunarya who has provided innovations to wayang so that it can keep up with the times and be recognized worldwide.

Actually, puppet shows do not only exist in Indonesia because many other countries also have puppet shows. However, the puppet show (Wayang) in Indonesia has its own style of storytelling and uniqueness, which is an original masterpiece from Indonesia. For this reason, UNESCO included it in the Representative List of Intangible Culture of Human Heritage in 2003.

There is no evidence that wayang existed before Hinduism spread in South Asia. It is thought that the performing arts were brought in by Indian traders. However, the local genius and culture that existed before Hinduism merged with the development of the incoming performing arts to give a distinctive color to the performing arts in Indonesia.

When a Catholic missionary, Brother Timotheus L. Wignyosubroto, FIC in 1960 in his mission to spread Catholicism, he developed Wayang Wahyu, whose source of stories came from the Bible.
