Solar System

The Solar System is a collection of celestial bodies consisting of a star called the Sun and all objects bound by its gravitational force. These include eight known planets with elliptical orbits, five dwarf planets, 290 identified natural satellites, and millions of other celestial bodies (meteors, asteroids, comets).

The Solar System is divided into the Sun, the four inner planets, the asteroid belt, the four outer planets, and at the outermost part is the Kuiper Belt and the dispersed disk. The Oort Cloud is thought to be located in the farthest region about a thousand times beyond the outermost part.

Based on their distance from the Sun, the eight planets of the Solar System are Mercury (57.9 million km), Venus (108 million km), Earth (150 million km), Mars (228 million km), Jupiter (779 million km), Saturn (1,430 million km), Uranus (2,880 million km) and Neptune (4,500 million km). The four innermost planets - Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars - are earthly planets made up of rocks and metals. The four outer planets are giant planets that are much larger than the earthly planets. The two largest planets, Jupiter and Saturn, are gas giants made up mainly of hydrogen and helium. The other two, Uranus and Neptune, are ice giants made up of compounds with melting points higher than hydrogen and helium, called volatile compounds such as water, ammonia and methane.

The Solar System is divided into the Sun, the four inner planets, the asteroid belt, the four outer planets, and at the outermost part is the Kuiper Belt and the dispersed disk. The Oort Cloud is thought to be located in the farthest region about a thousand times beyond the outermost part.

Based on their distance from the Sun, the eight planets of the Solar System are Mercury (57.9 million km), Venus (108 million km), Earth (150 million km), Mars (228 million km), Jupiter (779 million km), Saturn (1,430 million km), Uranus (2,880 million km) and Neptune (4,500 million km). The four innermost planets - Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars - are earthly planets made up of rocks and metals. The four outer planets are giant planets that are much larger than the earthly planets. The two largest planets, Jupiter and Saturn, are gas giants made up mainly of hydrogen and helium. The other two, Uranus and Neptune, are ice giants made up of compounds with higher melting points than hydrogen and helium, called volatile compounds such as water, ammonia and methane.

The Sun is the parent star of our Solar System and the main component of the Solar System. The star is 332,830 Earth masses in size. which results in a core density large enough to support sustained nuclear fusion and a tremendous amount of energy. Much of this energy is emitted into space in the form of eletromagnetic radiation, including the optical spectrum.

The Sun is categorized as a mid-sized yellow dwarf (G V type) star, but this name can be misleading, as compared to other stars in the Milky Way galaxy, the Sun is quite large and brilliant. Stars are classified using the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, which is a graph that plots the relationship of a star's luminosity value to its surface temperature. In general, hotter stars are more brilliant. Stars that follow this pattern are said to lie in the main sequence, and the Sun lies right in the middle of this sequence. However, stars that are brighter and hotter than the Sun are rare, while fainter and cooler stars are common.
