Semarang

Semarang City (Javanese: Hanacaraka: ꦯꦼꦩꦫꦁ, Pegon: سماراڠ) is the capital of Central Java province, Indonesia. It is the fifth largest metropolitan city in Indonesia after Jakarta, Surabaya, Bandung and Medan. As one of the growing cities on the island of Java, Semarang City has a population of around 1.6 million. The mega-urban area of Semarang incorporated in the Kedungsepur metropolitan area (Kendal Regency, Demak Regency, Ungaran Semarang Regency, Salatiga City, Semarang City, and Purwodadi Grobogan Regency) has a population of 7.3 million, as well as the fourth most populated metropolitan area in Indonesia, after Jabodetabek (Jakarta), Gerbangkertosusilo (Surabaya), and Greater Bandung (Bandung). In recent years, Semarang's significant development has been marked by the emergence of several skyscrapers scattered across the city and the structuring of the city with the construction of pedestrian-friendly places. These regional developments demonstrate Semarang's strategic role in the national economy.

Etymologically, the name "Semarang" comes from the word "asem", meaning "sour/tamarind tree", and the word "arang", meaning "rare", which is combined into "rare sour". The naming of "Semarang" began when Ki Ageng Pandanaran I came to an island called Tirang Island (near Bergota harbor) and saw a rare sour tree growing close together. The naming of Semarang City was changed during the Dutch East Indies colonialism era to "Samarang". Semarang City was one of three important port centers (Jakarta and Surabaya) for the Dutch East Indies as a supplier of crops from the interior of Java.

Semarang is one of the most important cities located on the north coast of Java and is the main hub connecting Jakarta-Surabaya and cities in the southern hinterland of Java (Surakarta and Yogyakarta). Semarang City has an elevation from 2 meters below sea level to 340 meters above sea level with a slope of 0%-45%. Semarang is a city with unique topographical conditions in the form of narrow lowland areas and hilly areas that extend from the west to the east side of Semarang City. The lowland area in Semarang City is very narrow.

The lowland area in the western part of Semarang City is only 4 kilometers wide from the coastline, while in the eastern part of Semarang City the lowland area widens to 11 kilometers from the coastline. These low-lying areas are the floodplains of major rivers that flow through Semarang City, such as Kali Garang (West Flood Canal), Kali Pengkol, and Kali Bringin. This lowland area stretches across the northern side of Semarang City and covers almost 40% of the total area of Semarang City. This lowland area is known as the lower city (Semarang Ngisor), as well as the center of the city's economic activities. Under such conditions, the lower city area is often hit by annual flooding, which peaks during the rainy season. In some areas, especially North Semarang, flooding is also sometimes caused by tidal flooding. The hilly area in Semarang City stretches on the south side. These hills are part of a series of mountainous formations in northern Java that stretches from Banten to East Java. The hilly area in Semarang City is known as the upper city (Semarang Dhuwur). This hilly area is also the upstream area of major rivers that flow in Semarang City. The upper city area is also part of the foothills of the Ungaran volcano, which is located on the southern side of Semarang City.

As the founder of the village, he later became the head of the local area, with the title Kyai Ageng Pandan Arang I. After his death, the leadership of the region was held by his son, whose title was Pandan Arang II (later referred to as Sunan Bayat or Sunan Pandanaran II or Sunan Pandanaran Bayat or Ki Ageng Pandanaran or Sunan Pandanaran only). Under the leadership of Pandan Arang II, the Semarang area showed increasing growth, which attracted the attention of Sultan Hadiwijaya of the Pajang Sultanate. As the requirements for regional improvement were met, the Sultan decided to make Semarang a regency, on May 2, 1547 to coincide with the anniversary of the Prophet Muhammad's birthday, the 12th of Rabiul Awal in 954 H, after consulting with Sunan Kalijaga. May 2 was later established as the anniversary of Semarang city. With the fall of Pajang to the Mataram Sultanate, Semarang was included in its territory.