Plants

In biology, plants are multicellular eukaryote organisms that belong to the kingdom Plantae. It consists of several clades, namely, flowering plants, Gymnosperms or open seed plants, Lycopodiopsida, ferns, mosses, and a number of green algae.

Green plants have sturdy cell walls containing cellulose. Green plants are included in the category of autotrophs (able to produce their own food). Almost all plant members are autotrophs, which produce their own energy by converting sunlight energy through a process called photosynthesis in cell organelles called chloroplasts. Because of the dominant green color in members of this kingdom, another name used is Viridiplantae ("green plants"). Another name is Metaphyta. However, some plants are parasitic and some have lost the ability to photosynthesize with little or no chlorophyll. Plants can also be characterized by the way they reproduce, their ability to grow, and the turnover of offspring.

About 350,000 species of organisms are recorded, excluding green algae. Of these, 258,650 are flowering plants and 18,000 are mosses. Green plants produce almost all the oxygen molecules on earth and are the most important part of the earth's ecological system. Domesticated plants can produce seeds, fruits and vegetables that are useful as a basis for human food. In addition, plants are also used as ornamental plants and many are medicinal and used in medical science. The study of plants is called botany, which is one of the branches of biology.

Most algae are no longer included in the Kingdom of Plantae. Algae comprise several distinct groups of organisms that produce energy through photosynthesis, each of which arose separately from a non-photosynthetic ancestor. The most conspicuous algae are marine weeds, multicellular algae that may more or less resemble terrestrial plants, but are classified alongside green, red and brown algae. Each of these algal groups also included different types of microscopic organisms and unicellular organisms. Most algae then also began to be separated from plant membership because they lacked tissue differentiation and did not form chlorophyll as an energy-capturing pigment.

The application of molecular biology techniques to plant phylogeny has provided much support for this separation. Plants in the sense now used (narrow sense) is considered to be a descendant of an ancient green algae.

Characteristics that are immediately recognizable in plants is greenish color but can be dominant yellow due to the content of chlorophyll pigments that play a vital role in the process of energy capture through photosynthesis. Thus, plants are generally autotrophic. Some exceptions, such as in some parasitic plants, are the result of adaptation to a unique way of life and environment. Because of their autotrophic nature, plants always occupy the first position in the chain of energy flow through living organisms (food chain).

Plants are stationary or can not move on their own will, although some green algae are motile (able to move) because it has a flagellum. As a result of this passive nature plants must adapt physically to environmental changes and disturbances received. Plant morphological variation is much greater than other members of the kingdom. In addition, plants produce a lot of secondary metabolites as a defense mechanism for environmental changes or attacks by intruders.

At the cellular level, cell walls composed of cellulose, hemicellulose and pectin are characteristic, although simple plants are sometimes composed only of pectin. Only plant cells have plastids; also vacuoles are large and often dominate the cell volume.