Social Media

Social media or often referred to as social media is a digital platform that facilitates users to interact with each other or share content in the form of writing, photos, videos, and is a digital platform that provides facilities to carry out social activities for each user. Social media is also a means of socializing with each other and is done online which allows humans to interact with each other without being limited by space and time.

The history of social media began in the 1970s, when a bulletin board system was invented to connect one person with another through electronic mail or uploading and downloading software. This activity was still done using a telephone line connected to a modem. In the 1980s, computers became commonplace and social media became very popular. "Relay Chat" began to appear on the Internet, and continued to grow in popularity until 1990. The first known social media was "SixDegrees.com", which was created in 1997 or 23 years ago. This application allowed users to upload profile photos and make friends with other users. In 1999, blogs began to be developed.

Social media is a tool that supports a social interaction using internet or web-based technology that can turn communication into an interactive dialog such as creating a communication relationship between a writer and his fans. Since its inception, social media has been intended as a place for users to easily participate, share, and exchange information and ideas in virtual communities and networks. Social media makes people's behavior patterns shift both culture, ethics and existing norms, covering a large population with various ethnic cultures, races and religions, and has a lot of potential for social change. In addition, social media is also used to document memories, learn about and explore things, advertise oneself, and make friendships as ideas grow from the creation of blogs, podcasts, videos, to various gaming sites.

The use of social media is huge and has an impact on the world. According to a 2021 survey, social media users in the world have reached 4.66 billion. This figure increased by 290% from 2015, where social media users at that time were around 1.55 billion users. Based on the number of users, Facebook occupies the first position as the most popular social media, reaching 2.7 billion users worldwide. According to the Pew Research Center, social media users tend to be younger. Nearly 90% of people between the ages of 18 and 29 use at least one form of social media. Social media use in the United States shows that 72 percent of adults use some form of social media. This figure is up from 2005 after Facebook launched a year ago, at which time social media users were only about 5 percent of the total population.

In Indonesia, social media users have reached 190 million users, or about 70 percent of the population. Based on a survey from the Indonesian Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, there are around 129 million Indonesians who have active social media accounts and spend an average of 3.5 hours per day consuming the internet via mobile phones. A study from 2009 suggests that there may be individual differences in how much social media users match extraversion and openness with positive relationships with social media, and how much social media non-users match emotionality and negative relationships with social media.

A separate study from 2015 found that people with a higher social comparison orientation seem to use social media more than people with a low social comparison orientation. Data from Common Sense Media shows that children under the age of 13 are already using social networking services despite the fact that many social media sites have policies stating that one must be at least 13 years old or older to join.

In 2017, Common Sense Media conducted another representative survey of parents of children aged 0 to 8 years old and found that 4% of children at this age use social media sites such as Instagram, Snapchat, and YouTube. A different survey by Common Sense also conducted a study in 2019 and successfully surveyed children aged 8-16 and found that around 31% of children aged 8-12 have used social media such as Snapchat, Instagram, or Facebook.