Technology

Technology is the overall means of providing goods necessary for the survival and comfort of human life. The use of technology by humans began with the conversion of natural resources into simple tools. The prehistoric discovery of the ability to control fire increased the availability of food resources, while the invention of the wheel helped humans to travel and control their environment. Recent technological developments, including the printing press, the telephone and the Internet, have minimized physical barriers to communication and allowed humans to interact freely on a global scale. However, not all technologies are used for peaceful purposes. The development of increasingly powerful weapons of destruction has been ongoing throughout history from clubs to nuclear weapons.

Technology has affected society and its surroundings in many ways. In many societies, technology has helped to improve the economy (including today's global economy) and has enabled increased leisure. Many technological processes produce unwanted by-products called pollutants and deplete natural resources, harm and damage the Earth and its environment. Different applications of technology have affected the values of a society and new technologies often raise new ethical questions. For example: the widespread notion of efficiency in the context of human productivity, a term that originally concerned only machinery. Another example is the challenge of traditional norms.

That this state of affairs harms the environment and excludes human beings. Advocates of ideas such as transhumanism and techno-progressivism view sustainable technological processes as beneficial to society and the human condition. Of course, at least until recently it was believed that technological development was limited to the human race, but recent scientific studies suggest that other primates and certain dolphin communities have developed simple tools and learned to pass on their knowledge to their offspring.

The development of technology takes place evolutively. Since the time of the Ancient Romans, thoughts and cultural results have appeared to be oriented towards the field of technology. Etymologically, the root of the word technology is "techne" which means a set of principles or rational methods related to the manufacture of an object, or certain skills, or knowledge of principles or methods, and art. The term technology itself was first used by Philips in 1706 in a book entitled Technology: A Description Of The Arts, Especially The Mechanical (Technology: A Description Of The Arts, Especially The Mechanical).

Beginning in England in the 18th century, the Industrial Revolution was a period of discovery of new technologies, especially in agriculture, manufacturing, mining, metallurgy, and transportation driven by the invention of steam power. Technology rose to the next level through the second industrial revolution with the invention of electricity and its derivatives such as the electric motor, incandescent light, and others. The advancement of science and the discovery of new concepts made flight possible and advances in medicine, chemistry, physics, and engineering. It also made possible the construction of skyscrapers and urban areas whose inhabitants depended on motors for transportation. Communication also developed with the invention of the telegraph, telephone, radio and television. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, planes and automobiles were invented for transportation.