Optical phenomena

Optical phenomena are any observable events that result from the interaction of light and matter.

All optical phenomena coincide with quantum phenomena. Common optical phenomena are often due to the interaction of light from the sun or moon with the atmosphere, clouds, water, dust, and other particulates. One common example is the rainbow, when light from the sun is reflected and refracted by water droplets. Some phenomena, such as the green ray, are so rare they are sometimes thought to be mythical. Others, such as Fata Morganas, are commonplace in favored locations.

Other phenomena are simply interesting aspects of optics, or optical effects. For instance, the colors generated by a prism are often shown in classrooms.

Optical phenomena include those arising from the optical properties of the atmosphere; the rest of nature (other phenomena); of objects, whether natural or human-made (optical effects); and of our eyes (Entoptic phenomena). Also listed here are unexplained phenomena that could have an optical explanation and "optical illusions" for which optical explanations have been excluded.

There are many phenomena that result from either the particle or the wave nature of light. Some are quite subtle and observable only by precise measurement using scientific instruments. One famous observation is of the bending of light from a star by the Sun observed during a solar eclipse. This demonstrates that space is curved, as the theory of relativity predicts.

Atmospheric optical phenomena include: Afterglow, Airglow, Alexander's band, the dark region between the two bows of a double rainbow., Alpenglow, Anthelion, Anticrepuscular rays, Aurora, Auroral light (northern and southern lights, aurora borealis and aurora australis), Belt of Venus, Brocken Spectre, Circumhorizontal arc, Circumzenithal arc, Cloud iridescence, Crepuscular rays, Earth's shadow, Earthquake lights, Glories, Green flash, Halos, of Sun or Moon, including sun dogs, Haze, Heiligenschein or halo effect, partly caused by the opposition effect, Ice blink, Light pillar, Lightning, Mirages (including Fata Morgana), Monochrome Rainbow, Moon dog, Moonbow, Nacreous cloud/Polar stratospheric, cloud, Rainbow,, Subsun, Sun dog, Tangent arc, Tyndall effect, Upper-atmospheric lightning, including red, sprites, Blue jets, and ELVES, Water sky

Other optical effects : Asterism, star gems such as star sapphire or star ruby, Aura, a phenomenon in which gas or dust surrounding an object luminesces or reflects light from the object, Aventurescence, also called the Schiller effect, spangled gems such as aventurine quartz and sunstone, Baily's beads, grains of sunlight visible in total solar eclipses.
camera obscura
